A B
C D
As Expounded by Dada Bhagwan
Self-Realization
A Simple and Eff ective Science for
Self-Realization
Originally Compiled in Gujarati by:
Pujyashree Deepakbhai Desai
Publisher : Mr. Ajit C. Patel
 Dada Bhagwan Vignan Foundation
 1, Varun Apartment, 37, Shrimali Society,
 Opp. Navrangpura Police Station,
 Navrangpura, Ahmedabad: 380009.
 Gujarat, India.
 Tel. : +91 79 35002100, +91 9328661166-77
©  Dada Bhagwan Foundation
 5, Mamta Park Society, B\h. Navgujarat College,
 Usmanpura, Ahmedabad - 380014, Gujarat, India.
 Email: info@dadabhagwan.org Tel.: +91 9328661166-77
 All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be
 shared, copied, translated or reproduced in any form
 (including electronic storage or audio recording) without
 written permission from the holder of the copyright.
 This publication is licensed for your personal use only.
1st Edition : 3,0000 copies, January 2013
2nd to
8th Edition : 1,73,000 copies, February 2013 to February 2018
9th Edition : 5,000 copies, March 2022
Web Version : January 2023
Price : Ultimate humility and the intent that
 'I do not know anything'!
Printer : Amba Multiprint
 B - 99, Electronics GIDC, K-6 Road,
 Sector - 25, Gandhinagar-382044.
 Gujarat, India.
 Tel. : +91 79 35002142, +91 9328660055
ISBN/eISBN : 978-93-85912-87-0
Printed in India
3
Trimantra
The Three Mantras That Destroy All Obstacles in Life
Namo Vitaraagaya
I bow to the Ones who are absolutely free from all attachment
and abhorrence
Namo Arihantanam
I bow to the living Ones who have annihilated all internal
enemies of anger, pride, deceit and greed
Namo Siddhanam
I bow to the Ones who have attained the state of total and fi nal
liberation
Namo Aayariyanam
I bow to the Self-realized masters who impart the Knowledge of
the Self to others
Namo Uvazzayanam
I bow to the Ones who have received the Knowledge of the Self
and are helping others attain the same
Namo Loye Savva Sahunam
I bow to the Ones, wherever they may be, who have received the
Knowledge of the Self
Eso Pancha Namukkaro
These fi ve salutations
Savva Pavappanasano
Destroy all demerit karma
Mangalanam Cha Savvesim
Of all that is auspicious
Padhamam Havai Mangalam
This is the highest
Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya
I bow to the Ones who have attained the absolute Self in human form
Om Namah Shivaya
I bow to all human beings who have become instruments for the
salvation of the world
Jai Sat Chit Anand
Awareness of the Eternal is Bliss
ǁ1ǁ
ǁ2ǁ
ǁ3ǁ
4
Who Is Dada Bhagwan?
In June 1958, around 6 o’clock one evening, amidst the
hustle and bustle of the Surat railway station while seated
on a bench, ‘Dada Bhagwan’ manifested completely within
the sacred bodily form of Ambalal Muljibhai Patel. Nature
revealed a remarkable phenomenon of spirituality! In the
span of an hour, the vision of the universe was unveiled to
him! Complete clarity for all spiritual questions such as,
‘Who are we? Who is God? Who runs the world? What is
karma? What is liberation?’ etc. was attained.
What He attained that evening, He imparted to others
through his original Scientifi c experiment (Gnan Vidhi) in
just two hours! This has been referred to as the Akram
path. Kram means to climb up sequentially, step-by-step
while Akram means step-less, a shortcut, the elevator path!
He, himself, would explain to others who Dada
Bhagwan is by saying, “The one visible before you is not
Dada Bhagwan. I am the Gnani Purush and the One who
has manifested within is Dada Bhagwan who is the Lord
of the fourteen worlds. He is also within you, and within
everyone else too. He resides unmanifest within you, whereas
here [within A. M. Patel], He has manifested completely!
I, myself, am not God (Bhagwan); I also bow down to the
Dada Bhagwan who has manifest within me.”

5
The Current Link to Attain Self-Realization
After attaining the Knowledge of the Self in 1958,
absolutely revered Dada Bhagwan (Dadashri) traveled
nationally and internationally to impart spiritual discourse
and Self-realization to spiritual seekers.
During his lifetime itself, Dadashri had given the
spiritual power to Pujya Dr. Niruben Amin (Niruma) to
bestow Self-realization to others. In the same way, after
Dadashri left his mortal body, Pujya Niruma conducted
spiritual discourses (satsang) and imparted Self-realization to
spiritual seekers, as an instrumental doer. Dadashri had also
given Pujya Deepakbhai Desai the spiritual power to conduct
satsang. At present, with the blessings of Pujya Niruma,
Pujya Deepakbhai travels nationally and internationally to
impart Self-realization as an instrumental doer.
After Self-realization, thousands of spiritual seekers
prevail in a state free from bondage and dwell in the
experience of the Self, whilst carrying out all their worldly
responsibilities.

6
Note About This Translation
The Gnani Purush, Ambalal M. Patel, also commonly
known as ‘Dadashri’ or ‘Dada’, gave spiritual discourses that
were in the form of answers to questions asked by spiritual
aspirants. These discourses were recorded and compiled into
books by Pujya Dr. Niruben Amin in the Gujarati language.
Dadashri had said that it would be impossible to translate
His satsangs and the Knowledge about the Science of Selfrealization word for word into other languages, because some
of the meaning would be lost in the process. Therefore, in order
to understand precisely the Akram Science of Self-realization,
He stressed the importance of learning Gujarati.
However, Dadashri did grant His blessings to translate
His words into other languages so that spiritual seekers could
benefi t to a certain degree and later progress through their own
eff orts. This book is not a literal translation, but great care has
been taken to preserve the essence of His original message.
Spiritual discourses have been and continue to be
translated from Gujarati. For certain Gujarati words, several
translated words or even sentences are needed to convey the
meaning, hence many Gujarati words have been retained within
the translated text for better understanding. Where the Gujarati
word is used for the fi rst time, it is italicized, followed by a
translation explaining its meaning in parenthesis. Subsequently,
only the Gujarati word is used in the text that follows. This
serves a two-fold benefi t; fi rstly, ease of translation and reading,
and secondly, make the reader more familiar with the Gujarati
words, which is critical for a deeper understanding of this
spiritual Science. The content in square brackets provides
further clarity regarding the matter, which is not present in
the original Gujarati content.
This is a humble attempt to present to the world, the
essence of His Knowledge. While reading this translation, if
there is any contradiction or discrepancy, then it is the mistake
of the translators and the understanding of the matter should
be clarifi ed with the living Gnani to avoid misinterpretation.

7
Special Note to the Reader
The Self is the Soul (Atma) within all living beings.
The term pure Soul is used by the Gnani Purush for
the awakened Self, after the Gnan Vidhi. The word Self,
with an uppercase ‘S’, refers to the awakened Self which is
separate from the worldly-interacting self, which is written
with a lowercase ‘s’.
Wherever Dadashri uses the term ‘we’, ‘us’, or ‘our’,
He is referring to Himself, the Gnani Purush.
Similarly, the use of You or Your in the middle of a
sentence, with an uppercase fi rst letter, or ‘You’, ‘Your’ in
single quotes at the beginning of the sentence, refers to the
state of the awakened Self or Pragnya. This is an important
distinction for the correct understanding of the diff erence
between the awakened Self and the worldly-interacting self.
Wherever the name ‘Chandubhai’ is used, the reader
should substitute his or her name and read the matter
accordingly.
The masculine third person pronoun ‘he’ and likewise
the object pronoun ‘him’ have been used for the most part
throughout the translation. Needless to say, ‘he’ includes
‘she’ and ‘him’ includes ‘her’.
For reference, a glossary of all the Gujarati words
is either provided at the back of this book or available on
our website at:
http://www.dadabhagwan.org/books-media/glossary/

Akram Science
A Simple and Eff ective Science
for Self-Realization
1. What Is the Goal of a Human Life?
Life has actually become entirely ‘fractured’. People do
not even have awareness of what they are living for. There is
no point to this life without a goal. You earn money, eat, drink,
and enjoy, and yet you keep worrying all day long; how can
that be considered the goal of life? This human life that you
have received, what is the point of letting it go to waste? So,
after attaining a human life, what should you do to accomplish
your goal? If you want worldly happiness, material pleasures,
then you should give others whatever you have.
In just one statement, understand the law of this world;
the essence of all the religions in the world is that the person
who wants happiness should give happiness to other living
beings, and the person who wants misery should make others
miserable. Give whatever suits you. Now, someone may ask,
“How is it possible for us to give happiness to others? We do
not have money.” But it is not that happiness can be given only
through money; you can keep an obliging nature with them,
run errands for them, or give them advice. You can oblige
others in many ways.
2 Self-Realization
There Are Two Types of Goals: The Worldly Goal
and the Ultimate Goal
There are two types of goals that should be decided
upon. [The fi rst is,] Live worldly life in such a way that no
one feels harassed by you, that no one ends up getting hurt
by you. Moreover, you should spend time in the company
and vicinity of good, spiritually elevated people and avoid bad
company; you should have such a goal. And for the second goal,
if you happen to meet a living Gnani Purush (the One who has
realized the Self and is able to do the same for others), then
[after attaining the Knowledge of the Self from Him] remain in
His satsang (spiritual company or association). Through this,
all your [spiritual] work will be accomplished, all your puzzles
will be solved [and liberation will be attained].
So what is the ultimate goal for humans? Only that of
attaining liberation (moksha); that should be the only goal.
You too want liberation, don’t you? For how much longer do
you want to keep on wandering aimlessly? You have done just
this for infi nite lives. There is no place left where you haven’t
wandered, is there! Why did you have to wander? It is because
you have not Known [the answer to] ‘who am I’. You have
not Known Your own Real form as the Self (Swaroop). You
should Know Your Real form. Should you not Know who You
are? Despite wandering so extensively, you still don’t Know
[the answer to] this? Is making money the only goal in life?
Should you not also do a certain extent for the purpose of
attaining liberation? Human beings truly have the potential to
become the absolute Self (Parmatma). To attain the state as the
absolute Self is the ultimate goal.
The Two Stages of Liberation
Questioner: The conventional defi nition of moksha is
freedom from the cycle of birth and death.
Dadashri: Yes, that is true. However, that is the fi nal
Self-Realization 3
stage of liberation; it is the secondary stage. In the fi rst stage,
the fi rst moksha refers to that in which an absence of [suff ering
amidst] the miseries of worldly life prevails. Even amidst
the miseries of worldly life, One remains unaff ected by the
miseries, a blissful state (samadhi) prevails amidst externallyinduced problems (upadhi); that is the fi rst moksha. And then,
once One leaves the physical body [permanently], ultimate
liberation takes place. However, the fi rst moksha should take
place here and now. Moksha has certainly happened for ‘us’,
hasn’t it! In spite of living in worldly life, One should remain
unaff ected by worldly life; moksha of that sort should take
place. It is possible for this to happen through Akram Vignan
(the step-less Science of Self-realization).
2. Attainment of Eternal Bliss Through the
Knowledge of the Self
What are all living beings searching for? They are
searching for happiness, but that happiness is not attained even
for a moment. Whether people attend weddings or go see a
play, their misery inevitably returns. How can the happiness
that is followed by unhappiness be considered happiness at all?
That is actually considered as happiness that is characterized
by gross unawareness arising from illusory attachment
(moorchha). Happiness should be permanent. This is actually
temporary happiness, and moreover, it is imaginary happiness,
it is believed to be so. What is every soul (atma) searching
for? Everyone is searching for permanent happiness, happiness
that is eternal. [People go on believing], ‘Happiness will come
from this, it will come from that. I will purchase this. I will
do this. If I build a bungalow, then I will be happy. If I buy
a car, then I will be happy.’ They keep on doing this, but no
happiness comes their way. On the contrary, they become more
and more wound up in the worldly entanglements. Happiness
indeed lies within; it indeed lies in the Self. Therefore, if the
Self is attained, [eternal] bliss is invariably attained.
4 Self-Realization
Happiness and Misery
Everyone in the world is searching for happiness, but
they have not decided on the defi nition of happiness at all.
‘Happiness should be such that it is never followed by misery.’
If any such happiness exists in this world, then go fi nd it.
Eternal bliss is actually within Oneself, it is only in the Self.
‘One’ is the abode of infi nite bliss, yet people have gone about
searching for pleasure in temporary things!
The Search for Eternal Bliss
For the One who attains eternal bliss, worldly suff ering
will not aff ect Him and that Self will have attained liberation.
Eternal bliss, that itself is called moksha. Of what use is any
other liberation? We want bliss. Do you like bliss or not? Tell
me.
Questioner: That is exactly what I am searching for.
Dadashri: Yes, moreover, you don’t want temporary
happiness. That happiness is followed by misery, so you don’t
like it. If there is eternal bliss, then there will be no misery;
you want such bliss. When you attain that bliss, that is called
moksha. What is the meaning of moksha? The answer is,
“When there is an absence of worldly misery, that is called
moksha!” Otherwise, no one prevails in a state in which there
is no worldly misery!
Firstly, there is the worldly science that the scientists
keep studying! And secondly, there is that which is considered
as internal Science, which enables one to attain His own eternal
bliss. So that which makes one attain His own eternal bliss is
known as the Science of the Self. Whereas that which provides
happiness that consists of temporary adjustments, all of that
is known as worldly science. Worldly science is ultimately
destructible and it brings about destruction. Whereas this
Akram Vignan is eternal and it makes One eternal!
Self-Realization 5
3. ‘I’ and ‘My’ Are Separate
Only the Gnani Gives Original Solutions
‘I’ is God [the Self] and ‘my’ is illusory attachment
(maya). ‘My’ is relative to ‘I’. ‘I’ is Real. If the properties
of the [original] Self are projected onto the ‘I’, even then
Your energies will increase greatly. The original Self cannot
be attained without the Gnani; however, the ‘I’ and ‘my’ are
completely separate. If everyone, including people outside
of India, understand just this much, then their problems will
lessen considerably. This is a [spiritual] Science. This is an
entirely unique approach of the spiritual research of Akram
Vignan. ‘I’ is the natural state of the Self, whereas ‘my’ is a
sense of ownership.
Separate ‘I’ and ‘My’
If you were told to separate ‘I’ and ‘my’ with a
‘separator’, then would you actually be able to separate them?
Is it worth separating ‘I’ and ‘my’ or not? Sooner or later, you
will have to know this, won’t you! Separate ‘I’ and ‘my’.
Just as there is a ‘separator’ that separates cream from milk,
similarly, separate this [‘I’ and ‘my’].
At the moment, are you identifying with ‘my’? Are you
the ‘I’ alone, or is the ‘my’ there alongside?
Questioner: The ‘my’ is bound to be there alongside!
Dadashri: What are all the things that fall under ‘my’
for you?
Questioner: My house and all the things inside my
house.
Dadashri: Are all of those things considered to be Yours
[of the Self]? And who does the wife belong to?
Questioner: She is also mine.
6 Self-Realization
Dadashri: And whose children are these?
Questioner: They are also mine.
Dadashri: And whose watch is this?
Questioner: It is also mine.
Dadashri: And whose hands are these?
Questioner: These hands are also mine.
Dadashri: Then you will also say, “My head, my body,
my feet, my ears, my eyes.” You refer to all these parts of the
body as ‘mine’, but who is it that says ‘mine’? Have you never
thought about that? You say, “My name is Chandubhai,” and
later you say, “I am Chandubhai”; do you not feel there is a
contradiction in this?
Questioner: Yes, I do.
Dadashri: You are Chandubhai; currently, both ‘I’ and
‘my’ are encompassed in that. The two railway lines of ‘I’ and
‘my’ are completely separate; they always run parallel, they
never merge. Nevertheless, you believe them to be one. Having
understood this, separate the ‘my’. Set aside everything that
falls under ‘my’. For example, [you say,] “My heart”; so set
that aside. What other things do we need to separate from
this body?
Questioner: The feet and all the sensory organs.
Dadashri: Yes, everything. The fi ve sensory organs
(gnanendriya; the body systems through which the knowledge
of sight, hearing, touch, smell, and taste is acquired) and the fi ve
organs of action (karmendriya; the eliminative organs, genital
organs, feet, hands, and tongue), the mind, the intellect, the chit
(inner faculty of knowledge and vision), the ego, everything.
Then do you say, “My egoism,” or do you say, “I am
egoism”?
Self-Realization 7
Questioner: My egoism.
Dadashri: If you say, “My egoism,” then you will be
able to maintain separation to that extent.
However, you do not know what lies beyond this, what
part is Yours. Due to which complete separation does not
happen. You only know what is Yours to a certain extent. You
only know the gross parts; you do not know the subtle parts at
all. As a matter of fact, the subtle parts need to be deducted,
then the subtler parts need to be deducted, then the subtlest parts
need to be deducted; that is a task only for the Gnani Purush.
However, if you keep on subtracting away each of the
spare parts, then it is possible to separate the ‘I’ and the ‘my’,
isn’t it? If you keep on deducting ‘my’ from ‘I’, what is it that
fi nally remains? If you set aside the ‘my’, then what is it that
ultimately remains?
Questioner: The ‘I’.
Dadashri: So that ‘I’ is precisely what You are! That is
all. That ‘I’ needs to be realized.
For that, you need ‘us’ [the Gnani Purush]. I will
separate everything for you. Subsequently, You will keep on
undergoing the experience that ‘I am pure Soul (Shuddhatma).’
That experience should take place. And alongside, I am also
giving You the divine vision (divyachakshu) so that You can
See the Self in every living being (Atmavat sarva bhuteshu).
4. How Can One Realize the ‘I’?
Chanting, Penance, Vows, and Self-Restraints
Questioner: Are penance (tapa), vows (vrat), and selfrestraints (niyam) necessary or not?
Dadashri: It is like this: all the medicines in the
pharmacy are necessary, but they are necessary for other
8 Self-Realization
people. You should only take the medicine that you need.
Similarly, taking vows, doing penance, upholding selfrestraints and so on are all necessary. None of that is wrong
in this world. There is nothing wrong with chanting and doing
penance, however, everything is correct according to every
individual’s viewpoint and expectation.
Questioner: Can a person attain liberation through
penance and rituals (kriya)?
Dadashri: Penance and rituals will beget fruits, but
not liberation. If you plant a neem seed, then you will get
bitter fruits, and if you plant a mango seed, then you will get
sweet fruits. Whatever fruit you want, plant accordingly. The
penance for liberation is diff erent altogether; it is internal
penance (antartapa). However, people believe that what they
do externally is penance. There are various types of penance
that are visible externally, but they are not like this [internal]
penance. The result of all of that is merit karma (punya). To
attain liberation, internal penance is needed, invisible penance
(adeethh tapa).
Questioner: Is liberation attained through chanting
mantras or through the path of Knowledge (Gnan marg)?
Dadashri: Chanting mantras leads to peace in worldly
life. A mantra is that which pacifi es the mind; it leads to worldly
pleasures, whereas there is no liberation without the path of
Knowledge. There is bondage through ignorance (agnan),
and there is freedom through Knowledge. The knowledge that
prevails in this world is knowledge that is attained through the
medium of the senses (indriya gnan). That is a wrong belief
(bhranti). Whereas Knowledge beyond the senses (atindriya
Gnan) is indeed the real Knowledge.
The one who wants to attain Self-realization and
liberation does not need rituals. The one who wants worldly
pleasures needs to carry out rituals. The one who wants to
Self-Realization 9
attain liberation needs only the Knowledge of the Self and
the directives (Agna) of the Gnani.
Only the Gnani Makes You Realize the ‘I’
Questioner: You say that we should realize our own
Self, so how can we do that?
Dadashri: You should come to ‘us’ for that. You should
say that you want to know who You are, so then I can help
you do that.
Questioner: This point about Knowing ‘who am I’; how
is that possible while remaining in worldly life (sansaar)?
Dadashri: Then where else can that be Known? Is there
any other place besides worldly life where one lives? In fact,
everyone in this world leads a worldly life and remains in
worldly life. Over here, it is possible to Know ‘who am I’.
This Science is indeed for the purpose of understanding who
You are. Come here, ‘we’ will make you realize Your true Self.
The Simple Way to Attain Liberation
Go and tell the One who is liberated, “Sir, please
liberate me!” That is the ultimate way, it is the best way [to get
liberated]. If the Knowledge of ‘who am I’ becomes decided,
then One can attain fi nal liberation. And as long as one has not
met an Atma Gnani (the Self-realized One), he should read
the books of an Atma Gnani.
The Self is a Scientifi c thing. ‘It’ is not something
that can be attained by [reading] books. ‘It’ has Its intrinsic
functional properties (gunadharma), It is Chetan (the living
entity), and It is the absolute Self (Parmatma) indeed. Once
It has been realized, then that’s it, salvation has been attained;
moreover, You are indeed That!
There is no need for any penance or renunciation on
the path of liberation. If one simply meets the Gnani Purush,
10 Self-Realization
then the Agnas (directives) of the Gnani are themselves the
religion, and the Agnas are themselves the penance. And
they are indeed the Knowledge (Gnan), Vision (Darshan),
Conduct (Charitra), Penance (Tapa); the direct result of which
is moksha.
It is only if one meets a Gnani Purush that the path
to liberation becomes easy and straightforward. It becomes
even easier than making a simple dish of rice and lentils
(khichadee).
5. Realization of ‘I’ Through the Gnani Purush
Is a Guru or a Gnani Needed?
Questioner: What should one do if he already has a
guru prior to meeting Dada?
Dadashri: If you do not wish to visit him, then it is not
mandatory for you to visit him. You may go if you wish to,
and if you do not wish to, then don’t go. In fact, you should
go simply for the reason that he does not feel hurt. You should
maintain humility towards him. At the time of taking Gnan, if
someone were to ask me, “Should I leave my guru now?” Then
I would tell him, “Hey, don’t leave him. It is on account of this
guru that you have reached this far.” Knowledge of worldly life
cannot be acquired without a guru, nor can the Knowledge that
leads to liberation. A worldly guru is for worldly interaction
(vyavahaar), whereas the Gnani Purush is for the Self and Its
realm (Nishchay). Worldly interaction is relative, whereas the
Self and Its realm is Real. A guru is needed for the relative,
whereas the Gnani Purush is needed for the Real.
Questioner: It is also said that ‘How can knowledge be
attained without a guru?’
Dadashri: A guru shows the way, he shows the path,
whereas the Gnani Purush imparts the Knowledge of the Self
(Gnan). The GnaniPurush is the One for whom nothing remains
Self-Realization 11
to be Known, He remains only as the Self. So, the Gnani
Purush can give you everything, whereas the guru guides you
in worldly life; if you do as he tells you, then you will be happy
in worldly life. The Gnani Purush is the One who imparts a
blissful state of the Self (samadhi) amidst mental, physical, and
externally-induced suff ering (aadhi-vyadhi-upadhi).
Questioner: Knowledge (gnan) is obtained through a
guru, but Knowledge [of the Self; Gnan] can only be obtained
through a guru who has attained Self-realization Himself, isn’t it?
Dadashri: ‘He’ should be a Gnani Purush, and
moreover, it is not enough to simply lead one to attain Selfrealization. The work gets accomplished when the Gnani
Purush gives all the explanations as to, ‘How does this world
run?’ ‘Who am I?’ ‘Who is this?’ Otherwise, you may keep
reading books, but books are just aids, they are not the main
thing. They are an ordinary cause; they are not an extraordinary
cause. What is an extraordinary cause? The Gnani Purush!
Who Can Make Others Do the Arpan Vidhi?
Questioner: Before attaining this Gnan, with regard
to the arpan vidhi (a rite in which the spiritual aspirant
fi guratively surrenders his all to the fully enlightened Lord)
that we do, if our fi rst guru has already made us do the arpan
vidhi and then we do this arpan vidhi again, then that is not
considered appropriate, is it?
Dadashri: A guru does not have one do the arpan vidhi.
As a matter of fact, what is to be surrendered? Everything
except for the Self (Atma). Hence, no one actually surrenders
everything, do they! One cannot surrender [everything], nor
would a guru ask anyone to do so. He simply shows you the
path. He functions as a guide. Whereas ‘we’ are not a guru,
‘we’ are the Gnani Purush, and [in this process of the Gnan
Vidhi] you realize God [the Self]. You are not to surrender to
me, you are to surrender to God.
12 Self-Realization
How Can One Experience the Self?
Questioner: How does the Knowledge of ‘I am the Self’
arise? How can one experience that?
Dadashri: It is to give that experience that ‘we’ are here.
When ‘we’ give you Gnan over here, ‘we’ separate the Self
(Atma) and the non-Self (anatma) and then send you home.
Gnan is not something that can be attained on one’s
own. If it were possible to attain It on one’s own, then all these
saints and ascetics would have already done so. However, that
is a job only for the Gnani Purush. The Gnani Purush is an
active evidence (nimit) for that.
Is a doctor needed or not for medicines? Or do you make
medicines by yourself at home? You remain so alert there,
[thinking], ‘If a mistake is made, then I could die!’ And when
it comes to the Self, one concocts a ‘mixture’ on his own!
He reads the scriptures using his own wisdom, without the
guidance of a guru; he prepares the ‘mixture’ himself and then
drinks it. The Lord has referred to this as swachchhand (to act
according to one’s own will and intellect). This swachchhand
has led to the death of infi nite lives! That other death was the
death of just one life!
Instant Liberation Through Akram Gnan
The Gnani Purush is currently present, so it is possible
to attain the path of liberation. Otherwise, these people think
a lot about it, but they are not able to fi nd the path and they
end up on the wrong path. A Gnani Purush rarely comes
around, and if the Knowledge of the Self (Gnan) is attained
from Him, then the Self can be experienced. Moksha should
be experienced here and now. Moksha should be experienced
here, in this body. Through Akram Gnan, it is possible to attain
moksha here and now and to experience it too!
Only the Gnani Separates the Self and the Non-Self
Suppose both gold and copper are mixed together in
Self-Realization 13
this ring. If you take it to your hometown and ask your family
members, “Please separate the gold and the copper for me!”
Then would all the people there separate them for you? Would
anyone do so?
Questioner: Only the goldsmith would do so.
Dadashri: The one whose occupation pertains to this,
the one who is an expert in this, that person would separate
the gold and the copper; he would separate one hundred
percent of the gold. This is because he knows the gunadharma
(intrinsic properties with a specifi c function) of both, he
knows that, ‘Gold has these gunadharma and copper has
these gunadharma.’ Similarly, the Gnani Purush Knows the
gunadharma of the Self and of the non-Self.
The gold and copper in this ring are in the form of a
mixture, so it is possible to separate them. If gold and copper
were to become a compound, then it would not be possible to
separate them. Otherwise, the properties would end up becoming
completely diff erent. Similarly, the Self and the non-Self are
a mixture, and they are not in a compound form. This is why
it is possible to identify their inherent nature once again. Had
they become a compound, the individual inherent nature would
never be found again. The gunadharma of the Self would not
be found, nor would the gunadharma of the non-Self be found,
and a third, entirely new gunadharma would emerge. However,
this is not the case. This is simply a mixture that has formed.
The Gnani Purush Is the Greatest Scientist of the
World
It is only the Gnani Purush, the world’s greatest
Scientist, who Knows this, and only He is able to separate
the two. Not only does He separate the Self and the non-Self,
but He burns away your demerit karma (paap) and annihilates
them completely, He gives You the divine eyes through which
the Real and the relative are Seen as separate (divya chakshu),
14 Self-Realization
and gives detailed explanations of everything such as, ‘What
is this world? How does it run? Who runs it?’ and so on. It is
then that Your entire spiritual work happens.
It is when the merit karma (punya) of tens of millions
of lifetimes awakens that the darshan (live connection
through sight) of a Gnani can happen; otherwise, is there any
possibility of this darshan taking place? In order to attain
Gnan, recognize the Gnani; there is no other way. The one
who seeks liberation will indeed fi nd Him.
6. Who Is the Gnani Purush?
The Defi nition of a Saint and a Gnani
Questioner: What is the diff erence between all of these
saints (sant) and the Gnani Purush?
Dadashri: A saint is someone who teaches others to
forgo their weaknesses and take up good things; they teach
others to stop doing bad deeds and start doing good deeds.
The one who rescues people from binding demerit karma
is a saint. However, the One who rescues people from both
demerit karma and merit karma is called a Gnani Purush. A
saint leads people to the right path, whereas the Gnani Purush
liberates people. The Gnani Purush is considered the fi nal
station; He will help you get your spiritual work done. Who
is a true Gnani? The One who has neither ego (ahamkaar)
nor ‘my-ness’ (mamata).
The One whose experience of the Self has become
complete is referred to as a Gnani Purush. ‘He’ is able to
describe the entire universe. ‘He’ is able to give all the answers.
The Gnani Purush is considered to be a wonder of the world.
The Gnani Purush is considered to be a lit lamp.
Recognizing the Gnani Purush
Questioner: How can the Gnani Purush be recognized?
Self-Realization 15
Dadashri: The Gnani Purush is such that He can
be easily recognized. ‘His’ fragrance is identifi able. The
environment around Him is entirely unique! ‘His’ speech is
entirely unique! ‘He’ can be identifi ed through His words.
Oh, He can be identifi ed simply by taking a look into His
eyes. Putting everything else aside, the Gnani Purush gives
a lot of assurance, tremendous assurance! And each and
every word of His is in the form of scriptures, provided they
are understood. ‘His’ speech, actions, and humility win over
people’s minds, they are such that they captivate the mind.
So, He has numerous characteristics.
The Gnani Purush is beyond the intellect (abudha).
The One who Knows the Self is absolutely blissful and does
not have any misery, even in the slightest extent. That is why
your salvation can happen through Him. The One who has
attained His own salvation can bring about your salvation. The
One who has been liberated can liberate you. Through Him,
hundreds of thousands of people can swim across the ocean
of worldly life and attain liberation.
Shrimad Rajchandra [a Self-realized Gnani Purush
who lived between 1867-1901] has said that who is a Gnani
Purush? ‘He’ is the One who does not have any type of desire
(spruha) in the slightest extent, He has no beggary of any
kind in the world, He has no beggary even for giving spiritual
instruction (updesh), nor does He have beggary for gathering
disciples, He has no beggary to change anyone for the better,
He has no subtle pride of doership (garva), He does not wallow
in worldly pleasures (garavata), He does not have the subtlest
of egoism (potapanu).
7. The Gnani Purush and A. M. Patel [Dadashri]
Dada Bhagwan is the Lord of the fourteen worlds. ‘He’
resides within you too, but He has not yet manifested within
you. ‘He’ remains in an unexpressed form within you, whereas
He has manifested within me. The One who has manifested
16 Self-Realization
is such that He can give you results. You will benefi t even by
saying His name just once. However, if you say His name with
the right understanding, then you will attain salvation, and if
you have any worldly diffi culties, even those will clear away.
The one who is visible here is not Dada Bhagwan.
You must be thinking that the person in front of you is Dada
Bhagwan, isn’t it? However, who you see here is a Patel
from Bhadran [a town in Gujarat, India]; ‘we’ are the Gnani
Purush, and the Lord who has manifested within is Dada
Bhagwan. ‘We’ are not God. ‘We’, too, bow down to the
Dada Bhagwan who has manifested within. Dada Bhagwan
and ‘we’ are indeed separate. Whereas people think that ‘we’
are Dada Bhagwan. No, how could ‘we’ be Dada Bhagwan?
This is actually a Patel from Bhadran.
[After attaining Gnan,] To follow Dada’s Agnas (fi ve
directives that preserve the awareness as the Self in Akram
Vignan) does not mean that they are A. M. Patel’s Agnas. The
Agnas are of Dada Bhagwan Himself, the One who is the Lord
of the fourteen worlds; ‘we’ are giving you the guarantee of
this. As it turns out, this discussion [about the Agnas] has been
expressed through me. So You should follow the Agnas. They
are not my Agnas, they are Dada Bhagwan’s Agnas. ‘We’, too,
remain in these Agnas, don’t ‘we’!
8. The Kramik Path and the Akram Path
There are two paths to attain liberation (moksha): one
is the Kramik path and the other is the Akram path. Kramik
means to climb one step after another. As one decreases his
parigrah (acquisitiveness towards worldly possessions), he
progresses towards liberation. This may take innumerable
lifetimes. And what is this Akram Vignan? There is no need
to climb steps. One simply has to get on the ‘lift’ [‘elevator’]
and go to the twelfth fl oor. This is a ‘lift’ path of a kind that
has emerged. One can directly enter the lift, along with the
wife and children; after getting the sons and daughters married,
Self-Realization 17
after taking care of everything [all the worldly duties], one
can still attain liberation. Despite doing all of these worldly
duties, one does not lose out on attaining liberation. This is
what the Akram path is like, and it is also considered to be a
path that is an exception. It emerges once every one million
years. So whoever enters the ‘lift’ attains salvation. ‘We’ are
simply an active evidence (nimit). Whoever enters this ‘lift’
attains the ultimate solution! The ultimate solution will need to
be brought about, won’t it? Shouldn’t you have the assurance
that you are indeed going to attain liberation after entering
the ‘lift’? The assurance of that is that anger, pride, deceit,
and greed do not arise, aartadhyan (adverse internal state that
results in hurting the self) or raudradhyan (adverse internal
state that results in hurting the self and others) do not arise.
So the [spiritual] work is completed in its entirety, isn’t it?
Experience of the Self Is Easily Attained Through
Akram
On the Kramik path (traditional step-by-step path of
spiritual progress), it is only after extensive eff orts that one
gains an inkling about the Self, and even that is very faint, and
the attentive awareness of the Self (laksh) does not set in at all.
One has to keep in one’s attentive awareness that, ‘The Self is
like this.’ Whereas on the Akram path, the experience of the
Self happens straight away. Whether the head hurts, hunger
arises, paralysis occurs, no matter how many diffi culties arise
externally, yet the peace within does not leave, that is considered
the experience of the Self. The experience of the Self even
turns pain into pleasure, whereas a person who is entrenched in
ignorance of the Self (mithyatvi) feels pain even amidst pleasure.
This is Akram Vignan, that is why samkit (the right belief
of ‘I am pure Soul’) is attained in such a short time. This is
actually a very elevated type of Science. ‘We’ create a division
between the Self and the non-Self, meaning a division between
what is Yours and what is not Yours. Within just one hour, ‘we’
18 Self-Realization
create a line of demarcation which defi nes which division is
Yours and which division is not Yours. If you struggle to do
this yourself, you will not accomplish this even in a hundred
thousand lifetimes.
The One Who Meets ‘Us’ Is Qualifi ed
Questioner: This path is so simplifi ed, so then do we
not need to have any qualifi cations? Is it open to anyone?
Dadashri: Some people ask ‘us’, “Am I qualifi ed [to
receive this Gnan]?” I tell them, “You have met ‘us’, so you
are qualifi ed.” The fact that we met means there are scientifi c
circumstantial evidences behind it. Therefore, whosoever meets
‘us’ is considered to be qualifi ed. Those who do not meet ‘us’
are not qualifi ed. What is the reason behind a person meeting
‘us’? It is because one is qualifi ed that he meets ‘us’. Despite
having met ‘us’, if one does not attain [Self-realization], then
it is his obstructing karma that is hindering him.
On the Kramik Path, One Has to Do, and in Akram...
A man once asked, “What is the diff erence between the
Kramik and the Akram path?” I replied, “On the Kramik path,
everyone says to forgo bad deeds and to do good deeds. Everyone
says the very same thing, that is the Kramik path.Kramik means
they all tell you to forgo things, to forgo deceit and greed, and
to turn towards doing good things. Is that not what you have
done up until now? Whereas this Akram means there is nothing
that needs to be ‘done’. There is no such thing as, ‘I am doing’
(karomi), ‘You are doing’ (karosi), and ‘They are doing’ (karoti)!
Akram Vignan is a spectacular wonder. After attaining
this Gnan, a person feels a signifi cant change the very next
day. Simply upon hearing this, people become convinced and
are attracted to this path.
In Akram, fundamentally, the change starts internally
indeed. On the Kramik path, purifi cation cannot take place
Self-Realization 19
internally. The reason for this is that one does not have the
capacity; there is no such internal ‘machinery’ set up and that
is why they have resorted to the external method. But when
will that external method reach the internal? It will reach the
internal when there is unity in thought, speech, and action; that
is when the change will start taking place internally. The main
thing is that there is no longer any unity in thought, speech,
and action [in the current era of the time cycle; in Kaliyug].
Akram Manifested as an Exception, Due to the
Lack of Unity in Thought, Speech, and Action
The world has discovered the path of progressing
towards liberation one step at a time. However, it is only
appropriate as long as one says and does exactly what is on
his mind; that path to liberation only continues working up
to that point. Otherwise, that path gets closed off . In this era
of the time cycle, the unity in thought, speech, and action has
become disrupted, and that is why the Kramik path has become
fractured. That is why ‘we’ say, “As the basement of the
Kramik path has decayed, Akram has emerged.” Everything
is allowed here; you are accepted just as you are. The fact that
you have met ‘us’ is enough! So for ‘us’, there is no need to
bother with what happens externally.
Attained Through the Grace of the Gnani
Questioner: The Akram path that You speak of may
be fi ne and easy for a Gnani like You. However, for ordinary
people like us, those who have to live and work in worldly
life, it is a bit diffi cult. So what is the solution for that?
Dadashri: God has manifested within the Gnani
Purush, the Lord of the fourteen worlds has manifested within
Him; if you meet such a Gnani Purush, then what remains?
It is not to be done through your own energy, it will happen
through His grace. Through His grace all kinds of changes
20 Self-Realization
can happen. Therefore, whatever you ask for ‘here’, it will all
get accomplished. ‘You’ do not need to ‘do’ anything. ‘You’
simply have to remain in the Agnas of the Gnani Purush. This
is Akram Vignan. Therefore, You should extract Your work
directly from this living God, and He will remain present for
You at each and every moment, not just for one or two hours.
Questioner: So, if we entrust everything to Him, does
that mean that He will take care of everything for us?
Dadashri: ‘He’ indeed does everything; You do not have
to ‘do’ anything. By ‘doing’, karma gets bound. All You have
to do is to hop into the ‘lift’ and follow the fi ve Agnas. Once
You get on the ‘lift’, do not jump around or stick your hand
out. That is all You have to ‘do’. Rarely does such a path come
along and it is only meant for those with tremendous merit
karma (punyashali). This is considered the eleventh wonder
of the world! Whoever acquires the ‘ticket’, his [spiritual]
work is done.
The Akram Path Continues
‘Our’ intention for this is simply that you too attain
the bliss that ‘we’ have attained. So this Science that has
manifested will not get buried just like that. ‘We’ will leave
behind a lineage of Gnanis, ‘we’ will set in place ‘our’ heirs,
and subsequently, the link of Gnanis will continue. Therefore,
seek out the living Gnani (sajeevan murti). It is not possible
to arrive at the ultimate solution without Him.
‘We’ are personally going to give ‘our’ spiritual powers
(siddhis) to some people. Won’t this be necessary after ‘our’
departure? The future generations will need this path, won’t
they?
9. What Is the Gnan Vidhi?
Questioner: What is this Gnan Vidhi of Yours?
Self-Realization 21
Dadashri: The Gnan Vidhi separates the non-Self
complex (pudgal) and the Self (Atma)! It separates the pure
Self (shuddha Chetan) and the non-Self complex.
Questioner: This is fi ne in theory, but I want to know
about the process.
Dadashri: One does not have to give anything, one
simply has to sit here and repeat exactly what is being
spoken. [It is a two-hour experiment of Knowledge that
leads to the realization of ‘who am I’. For 48 minutes, one
is asked to repeat sentences of the Science of separation
(bhed Vignan), which separates the Self and the non-Self.
All those who are present are to repeat these together.
Subsequently, over the course of an hour, the fi ve Agnas
are explained in detail with examples, in which one is
informed on how to conduct life from this point forward
so that new karma do not get charged, how karma bound in
the past can be exhausted completely, and along with that,
how the established awareness (laksh) of ‘I am pure Soul’
can always prevail.]
10. What Happens in the Gnan Vidhi?
When ‘we’ give Gnan, your karma get completely
annihilated, and at that time, many veils of ignorance over
the Self (avaran) break. At that time, through the grace of the
Lord, One becomes aware [as the Self]. Upon awakening as
the Self, that awakened awareness (jagruti) does not leave.
Subsequently, it is possible to remain ever aware. Thus, the
conviction (pratiti) of ‘I am pure Soul’ defi nitely remains
uninterruptedly. Once the Self has been experienced, the belief
that ‘I am the body’ (dehadhyaas) is gone. As the belief that ‘I
am the body’ is gone, the binding of new karma ceases. First
comes liberation from ignorance of the Self. Then, after one
or two more lifetimes, fi nal liberation is attained.
22 Self-Realization
Karma Get Destroyed in the Fire of Knowledge
What happens on the day ‘we’ give a person this Gnan?
The person’s [demerit] karma get annihilated completely in
the fi re of Knowledge. Two types of karma get annihilated,
and one type of karma remains. The karma that are in the form
of vapor get destroyed, and the karma that are in the form of
water also get destroyed. And the karma that are in the form
of ice do not get destroyed. This is because these karma have
solidifi ed, they are ready to give result, so then they do not
let up. However, the fi re of Knowledge annihilates the karma
that are in the form of water and vapor. That is why people
feel so light immediately upon receiving Gnan; the awakened
awareness immediately increases for them. This is because,
as long as the karma do not get annihilated, the awakened
awareness would not increase for a person! The karma that are
in the form of ice remain to be suff ered. Nonetheless, ‘we’ have
shown all the ways by which they become easier to suff er such
as, singing ‘Dada Bhagwan Na Aseem Jai Jaikar Ho (infi nite
glorious salutations to Dada Bhagwan),’ saying the Trimantra
(the three mantras that destroy all obstacles in life), and saying
the Nine Kalams (nine statements in which one asks for energy
to the pure Soul within for the highest spiritual intents).
The absence of worldly miseries is considered the fi rst
experience of liberation. This happens to You the day after
‘we’ give Gnan. Subsequently, the burden of this body, the
burden of karma, all get lifted; that is the second experience.
Thereafter, there is so much bliss that it is indescribable!
Questioner: The Gnan that we have received from You
is Itself Atma Gnan (Knowledge of the Self), isn’t it?
Dadashri: What You have received is not Atma Gnan,
that which has manifested within is Atma Gnan. Upon
repeating what ‘we’ say [during the Gnan Vidhi], your demerit
karma get annihilated, and the Gnan manifests within. Has It
not manifested for You?
Self-Realization 23
Questioner (Mahatma): Yes, It has.
Dadashri: Is it easy to attain the Self? During the Gnan
Vidhi, the demerit karma get annihilated. What is the second
thing that happens? The Self and the body complex become
separate. The third thing that happens is that the Lord’s grace is
bestowed. Therefore, constant awakened awareness emerges,
Pragnya (the direct light of the Self) begins to function.
From the Second Day of the Lunar Cycle to the
Full Moon Stage
Before ‘we’ give Gnan, for time immemorial, meaning
the hundreds of thousands of lifetimes that have passed, one
was in the lunar phase of the new moon. Do you understand
this? There was no moon! Since time immemorial, everyone has
been living only in ‘darkness’ [in the form of ignorance of the
Self]. They have not seen the ‘light’ [in the form of Knowledge]
at all. They have not seen the ‘moon’ at all! So when ‘we’ give
this Gnan, the ‘moon’ becomes present. Initially, there is light
that is similar to that of the second day of the lunar cycle. And
when ‘we’ give the complete Gnan,It manifests within. To what
extent? It is comparable to that of the second day of the lunar
cycle. Then You should progress to the full moon stage in this
life. From the second day of the lunar cycle to the third day, the
fourth day, from the fourth day to the fi fth day… and when One
reaches the full moon stage, One will have become complete!
That means the stage of absolute Knowledge has been attained.
Karma do not get bound, the karma stop getting bound. There
is no anger, pride, deceit, or greed. Before, you were actually
Chandubhai and that indeed was the illusion. Now, ‘I indeed
am Chandubhai’ is gone. That illusion is gone. Now remain in
the Agnas that You have been given.
If you come here for Gnan Vidhi, then ‘we’ will wash
away all your demerit karma. Then You will be able to See
your own faults. And once You begin to See your own faults,
know that You are now ready to attain liberation.
24 Self-Realization
11. The Importance of Following the Agnas
After Attaining Gnan
The Agnas Are for the Protection of Gnan
After ‘we’ give Gnan, You experience the Self, so what
is left for You to ‘do’? To follow the Agnas of the Gnani
Purush. The Agnas themselves are the religion and the Agnas
themselves are the penance. And ‘our’ Agnas are never
restrictive towards worldly life in any way. Despite living in
worldly life, nothing of worldly life will aff ect You. This is
what Akram Vignan is like.
The current era of the time cycle is such that there
is kusang (bad company; association that takes one away
from the Self) everywhere. From the kitchen to the offi ce, at
home, on the street, outside, in the car, in the train; there is
kusang everywhere. Because there is kusang, the Gnan ‘we’
have given You in two hours ends up becoming devoured by
kusang. Would kusang not devour It? For this reason, ‘we’
have given the protective enclosure of the fi ve Agnas. If
You maintain this protection, then there will not be even the
slightest change in the inner state. This Gnan will remain in
the same state as It was when It was given. If the protective
enclosure breaks, then the Gnan will get destroyed, It will
get annihilated.
‘We’ have given You this Gnan and with the
Knowledge of separation, the separation has already
happened. However, in order for this separation to prevail,
‘we’ are giving You the fi ve Agnas for protection. This is
so that You do not get robbed of that [invaluable treasure
of Gnan] by all, as it is Kaliyug (the current era of the time
cycle, which is characterized by moral and spiritual decline).
For the seed of Gnan to blossom, It has to be watered and
nurtured, doesn’t It? Does a small protective enclosure not
need to be put in place?
Self-Realization 25
What Spiritual Practice Needs to Be Done After
Gnan?
Questioner: What type of spiritual practice (sadhana)
should One do after attaining this Gnan?
Dadashri: The only spiritual practice is to follow
the fi ve Agnas! There is no other sadhana now. All other
sadhana leads to bondage. These fi ve Agnas lead to release
from bondage.
Questioner: Is there anything that is higher than these
fi ve Agnas?
Dadashri: These fi ve Agnas are a protective enclosure
so that nobody can take away Your priceless treasure. If You
maintain that protective enclosure, then the Gnan will remain
exactly as ‘we’ have given It to You, and if the protective
enclosure becomes weakened, then someone will enter in and
cause havoc. So then ‘we’ will have to come back to repair
it. So as long as You stay within the fi ve Agnas, ‘we’ give
the guarantee that there will be constant samadhi (a blissful
state that comes about when one becomes free from mental,
physical, and externally-induced suff ering).
There Is Speedy Progress Through the Agnas
Questioner: The progress that is made by mahatmas after
attaining Gnan, what is the speed of that progress dependent
upon? What should we do so as to speed up the progress?
Dadashri: If One follows the fi ve Agnas, then it will
happen quickly, and the fi ve Agnas are the very reason for
that. As You follow the fi ve Agnas, the veils of ignorance over
the Self break, and the energies of the Self begin to manifest.
The energy that was unexpressed begins to manifest. By
following the fi ve Agnas, the energies of the Self (aishwarya)
manifest. All kinds of energies manifest. It is all dependent
upon following the Agnas.
26 Self-Realization
To remain sincere to ‘our’ Agnas is considered the
greatest attribute. By remaining in ‘our’ Agnas, the One
who achieves a state in which the intellect is not employed,
becomes just like ‘us’! However, as long as One is nurturing
the Agnas, no change should be made to the Agnas. Then there
will be no problem.
Only the Firm Resolve Makes You Follow the Agnas
To want to follow Dada’s Agnas is the greatest thing of
all. You should make the decision to follow the Agnas. Do not
scrutinize whether or not You are able to follow the Agnas.
However much You are able to follow the Agnas is correct.
However, You should decide that You want to follow the Agnas.
Questioner: There is no problem if the Agnas are not
followed completely, is there?
Dadashri: It is not that there is no problem. ‘You’ should
decide that You defi nitely want to follow the Agnas! From the
time you wake up in the morning, decide, ‘I only want to stay
in the fi ve Agnas, I want to follow them.’ From the moment
You decide this, You will have come into ‘our’ Agnas, and
that is all ‘we’ want.
If you forget to follow the Agnas, do pratikraman for it
by saying, ‘Oh Dada, I forgot during these two hours, I forgot
Your Agnas. However, I do want to follow the Agnas. Please
forgive me.’ Then You will get full passing marks; You will
get one hundred percent marks. So You will be relieved of
Your responsibility. Once You come into the Agnas, nothing
in the entire world will aff ect You. If You follow ‘our’ Agnas,
then nothing will aff ect You.
Real Purusharth Begins by Following the Agnas
When ‘we’ gave Gnan, You became separate from the
prakruti (the relative self). ‘I am pure Soul’ means You are
the Purush (Self-realized; the Self), and after that, there is
Self-Realization 27
Purusharth (spiritual eff ort to progress as the Self), this is
the Real Purusharth.
Questioner: Please explain the diff erence between Real
Purusharth and relative purusharth.
Dadashri: In Real Purusharth, nothing needs to be
‘done’. The diff erence between the two is that Real Purusharth
means to See and Know. And what does relative purusharth
mean? It means to have the intent [of doership], ‘I will do this.’
The purusharth you were doing as Chandubhai was
illusory purusharth. But when You do Purusharth as the pure
Soul and remain in Dada’s fi ve Agnas, that is Real Purusharth.
That is considered as doing Purusharth after becoming the
Purush.
Questioner: The seed of Gnan that has been sown, is
that Itself the Light (jyoti) [of Knowledge and Vision]?
Dadashri: Indeed! However, It is like the second day of
the lunar cycle. Now, It will gradually become the full moon.
Real Purusharth begins from the moment the pudgal (the
non-Self complex) and the Self (Purush) become separate.
Where Purusharth begins, it will take One from the second
day of the lunar cycle to the full moon state. Yes! That will
happen when One follows the Agnas. There is nothing else
that needs to be ‘done’. Only the Agnas need to be followed.
Questioner: Dada, please describe the Purusharth
after One becomes a Purush. How would One be prevailing
in worldly interaction?
Dadashri: All these mahatmas are certainly carrying out
worldly interactions, aren’t they? The fi ve Agnas are verily
Dada. They are the Real Purusharth.
To follow the fi ve Agnas is called Purusharth, and what
happens as a result of following the fi ve Agnas? ‘You’ are able
to remain in the state as the Knower-Seer (Gnata-Drashta).
28 Self-Realization
And if someone were to ask ‘us’, “What is Real Purusharth?”
Then ‘we’ would reply, “It is to remain as the Knower-Seer!”
So these fi ve Agnas indeed teach You to remain as the KnowerSeer, don’t they?
‘We’ keep a lookout for this; wherever One has begun
Purusharth with sincerity, ‘our’ grace is defi nitely bestowed
onto Him.
12. The Experience of the Self in Three Stages:
Experience, Established Awareness, Conviction
Questioner: What happens when the Self has come
into experience?
Dadashri: When the Self has come into experience,
the belief that ‘I am the body’ (dehadhyaas) departs. When
this belief departs, the binding of new karma ceases. So what
more could a person want?
What Chandubhai was like before and what he is like today
can be understood. So why is there this diff erence? It is because
of the experience of the Self. Before, there was the experience of
‘I am this body’, whereas now, there is the experience as the Self.
Conviction means that Your entire belief has changed
a hundred percent, and ‘I am definitely the pure Soul’
has become an established fact. Whereas if just the faith
(shraddha) that ‘I am pure Soul’ sets in, it may later leave.
However, the conviction never leaves. Faith may change, but
conviction never changes.
Conviction means suppose we take a stick and bury it
halfway in the ground. Now if a lot of pressure is applied to
the stick, it may fl ex and bend a little, but it will not change
its position. No matter how forceful the unfolding of karma,
even with the unfolding of terrible karma, the conviction will
not change its position. [The conviction of] ‘I am pure Soul’
will never go away.
Self-Realization 29
So, the experience (anubhav), established awareness
(laksh), and conviction (pratiti) as the Self; these three remain.
The conviction remains all the time. The established awareness
remains sometimes. When we become involved in some work,
we may miss out on the established awareness, and once there
is respite from work, the established awareness returns. And
the experience as the Self comes about when one is relieved
from work and all other duties and sits in solitude; that is
when the experience will be felt. Mind you, the experience
will inevitably keep growing.
The experience, established awareness, and conviction
as the Self. The conviction is the foundation. Once that
foundation is set in place, the established awareness emerges.
Subsequently, the established awareness of ‘I am pure Soul’
remains constantly. And during the time of respite, when You
remain as the Knower-Seer for a small amount of time, that
is the experience as the Self.
13. The Importance of Satsang With the
Living Gnani
The Necessity of Satsang to Solve Entanglements
Through this Akram Vignan, You too have indeed
attained the experience of the Self. However, You have
acquired It through the Gnani’s grace; thus, in order for You
to take benefi t of this, in order to progress spiritually, You
should understand It by increasing your familiarity with the
Gnani more and more.
This Gnan should be understood in detail. This is
because this Gnan has been given to You in the span of just
one hour. And how vast this Gnan is! The Gnan which cannot
even be attained in ten million years, that Gnan is attained
within just one hour. However, [the Gnan is acquired] at a
basic level. Later on, It should be understood minutely and
in detail, shouldn’t It? ‘We’ explain It in detail when You sit
30 Self-Realization
with ‘us’ and continue asking questions. That is why ‘we’ say
that satsang (spiritual gathering conducted in a question and
answer format; company or association of those who promote
the attainment of the Self) is very crucial. As You continue
asking questions over here about the entanglements you face,
those entanglements will start becoming untangled within.
Whoever has a burning question should ask it.
It Is Necessary to Sprinkle Water After Sowing
the Seed
Questioner: Even after taking Gnan, it is a bit diffi cult
to bring into awareness that ‘I am pure Soul.’
Dadashri: No, that is something that happens naturally.
It is not something to be brought about, it defi nitely remains
on its own. What needs to be done for that? You have to come
to ‘us’ [attend satsang of the Gnani Purush]. The ‘water’ that
needs to be ‘sprinkled’ is not getting ‘sprinkled’, that is why
all of this becomes diffi cult. If you do not pay attention to your
business, then what would happen to your business?
Questioner: It would decline.
Dadashri: Yes, so this is comparable to that. ‘You’ have
taken Gnan, so ‘water’ needs to be ‘sprinkled’ on it, then the
‘sapling’ will grow. Even a small sapling needs a sprinkling
of water. So once every month, every two months, You need
to ‘sprinkle’ some water on It.
Questioner: We ‘sprinkle’ it at home.
Dadashri: No, but it will not do if You do it at home.
Would that do? The Gnani has come here in person, and You
have no value for that at all! Did you attend school or not?
How many years did you attend school?
Questioner: Ten years.
Dadashri: And what did you learn there? Language!
Self-Realization 31
You spent ten years learning this English language, whereas
‘we’ are only asking You to spend six months with ‘us’. If
You stay in close touch with ‘us’ for six months, then Your
[spiritual] work will get done.
If There Is a Firm Resolve, Then the Obstacles
Will Break
Questioner: I have many commitments that I have made
in the past, so it becomes diffi cult to come here.
Dadashri: If Your intent (bhaav) is strong, then those
[obstacles] will break. ‘You’ should examine whether Your
intent within is strong or weak.
Guaranteed Profi t in Worldly Life by
Attending Satsang
All these businessmen who come to ‘us’ are such that if
they were to arrive at their shops an hour late, they would incur
a hefty loss. So ‘we’ told them, “For as long as you are here, you
will not incur a loss. And if you stop at your shop on the way
for half an hour or so, then you will incur a loss. If you come
here, then the liability is ‘ours’.” This is because ‘we’ do not
have anything to give or take in this. So, You have come here
only for the sake of Your Self. That is why ‘we’ tell everyone,
“You will not incur a loss in any way if you come here.”
Dada’s Phenomenal Satsang
When the karma that is unfolding is burdensome, then
You should understand, ‘This unfolding of karma is diffi cult
to bear, so remain calm.’ When the unfolding of karma is
burdensome, then cool Chandubhai down and stay put in
satsang. Things will certainly carry on like this. There is no
telling what kind of karma will unfold!
Questioner: What is the solution to increase the
awakened awareness (jagruti) to an exceptional level?
32 Self-Realization
Dadashri: It is to remain in satsang.
Questioner: ‘You’ say that when someone sits with You
[in satsang] for six months, then a transformation happens at a
gross level, which is followed by transformation at a subtle level.
Dadashri: Yes, the transformation keeps taking place
simply by sitting here with ‘us’. Therefore, One should have
familiarity [with the Gnani], for two hours, three hours, fi ve
hours; there will at least be the benefi t of however much You
credit. After attaining Gnan, some people think, ‘We no longer
have any work left to do!’ However, the transformation has
not yet happened at all!
Remain in the Vicinity of the Gnani
Questioner: What self-driven motive should mahatmas
maintain to attain the absolute state of the Self?
Dadashri: Only the motive to spend as much of One’s
life as possible with Dada; no other motive. Whether it is
day or night, wherever it is, but One should remain in close
proximity with Dada. Remain in His vicinity [such that His
vision falls on You].
By sitting here in satsang, the karmic load continues
to decrease, whereas everywhere else, the karmic load keeps
increasing; there is nothing but entanglement there. ‘We’ are
giving You a guarantee that however much time You spend here
in satsang, you will never encounter a loss in your business for
that amount of time, and if you look at the balance sheet, then
you will fi nd that in the end, you have made only a profi t. Is
this any ordinary satsang? For the One who allocates time to
spend only for the Self, how can He incur any loss in worldly
life? There will be nothing but profi t. However, One will benefi t
only if He understands this! Time spent sitting in this satsang
will not be spent in vain. What a wonderful time has come!
During Lord Mahavir’s time, if people wanted to go to satsang,
Self-Realization 33
they had to walk all the way there! Whereas today, you can sit
in a bus or a train and arrive at satsang in no time at all!
Live Satsang Is the Best of All
When you sit here, even if you don’t do anything, the
changes will still keep happening within. This is because it
is satsang; Sat meaning the Self, association (sang) with the
Self! ‘This’ [the Gnani Purush] is the manifest Self; to sit in
His company is considered the ultimate satsang.
By remaining in satsang, it [the fi lled stock of karma]
will all empty out. This is because by remaining with ‘us’, by
observing ‘us’, You will attain direct energies from ‘us’ and so
Your awakened awareness (jagruti) will increase tremendously!
‘You’ should make the eff ort to remain in satsang. If there is
continuous touch with satsang, then Your work will be done.
What does it mean to get Your work done? Try to do
darshan (devotional viewing of the Gnani Purush) as much
as possible. As much as possible, take benefi t of attending
satsang, where You can See Him directly. If that does not end
up happening, then have remorse for that. Do the darshan of
the Gnani Purush and remain seated in His company.
14. The Importance of Reading Dada’s Books
and Magazines
The Aptavani Procures Results on Its Own!
This is the speech of the Gnani Purush and moreover,
it is fresh. Its phases are current [subject to the physical
evidences, location, time, and intent], so simply upon reading
[the speech that is compiled into written format] all your
phases continue to change, and bliss keeps arising. This is
because this is speech that is without attachment or abhorrence.
If it is speech that is without attachment or abhorrence, then
it yields result, otherwise it does not. The speech of Lord
34 Self-Realization
[Mahavir] was without attachment and abhorrence, so it is
impactful even today. Thus, the speech of the Gnani Purush
is also eff ective. There is no other solution but to have speech
that is devoid of attachment or abhorrence.
When One Does Not Get Direct Touch With
the Gnani
Questioner: Dada, if I cannot stay in touch with You,
then how much will [Dada’s] books help?
Dadashri: Everything will help. Everything of Dada’s
here, they are Dada’s words, Dada’s intent, so they will all help.
Questioner: But there is a diff erence between this and
having a personal touch, isn’t there?
Dadashri: If you try to evaluate the diff erences, then
there are diff erences in everything. So, you should do whatever
presents itself in front of you at any given time. What should
be done when Dada is not around? Read Dada’s books. Dada
is indeed there in the books, isn’t He! Otherwise, the moment
you close your eyes, You will See Dada!
15. The World Is Flawless Through the Five
Agnas
Flawless Vision Starts After Gnan
Without Self-realization, mistakes cannot be Seen. This
is because [the belief that,] ‘I indeed am Chandubhai, and I
have no faults, I am well-behaved,’ prevails. Whereas after
attaining Self-realization, You have become impartial, You do
not have partiality towards the mind, speech, and body. That
is why You are able to See your own mistakes.
The One who fi nds his own mistake, the One who can
See his own mistake at each and every moment, wherever a
mistake arises, He is able to See it, He has become the absolute
Self-Realization 35
Self! Once it is understood that ‘I am not Chandubhai, I am
pure Soul,’ One can become impartial. When no one’s fault
is seen in the slightest, and when all of one’s own faults are
Seen, that is when it is considered that Your [spiritual] work
has been accomplished. Once one’s own faults start being
Seen, the Gnan ‘we’ have imparted starts giving result. Once
one’s own faults start being Seen, other people’s faults are not
seen. To see the faults of others is considered a grave off ense.
In this fl awless world, no one is at fault at all, so how
can anyone be blamed? As long as there are faults, the ego
cannot be eradicated. Faults are to be washed off to the point
that the ego gets eradicated.
The fact that anyone is seen at fault means that some
mistake of yours still remains. At some point or the other,
You will have to See [the world] as fl awless, won’t You? All
this is indeed because of your karmic account. Even if You
understand this much in short, then it will all be very useful.
The Flawless Vision Increases by Applying the Agnas
I See the world as fl awless. When this Vision arises for
You, this ‘puzzle’ will become solved. ‘We’ will give you
such a Light [Knowledge of the Self] and wash away so many
demerit karma of yours so that Your Light remains, and You
will begin Seeing [the world as] fl awless. And along with this,
‘we’ will give You the fi ve Agnas. If You remain in those fi ve
Agnas, then they will prevent the Gnan that has been imparted
from becoming fractured even in the slightest extent.
From That Point, the Right Belief Is Attained
From the moment one’s own faults are Seen, One is
considered to have attained samkit (the right belief of ‘I am pure
Soul’). When one’s own faults are Seen, know that You have
awakened; otherwise, everything simply carries on in ‘sleep’. It
isn’t worth worrying over whether or not your faults have come
36 Self-Realization
to an end; instead, the awakened awareness (jagruti) is required
fi rst and foremost. Once the awakened awareness emerges,
new faults will no longer arise and the old faults will continue
emptying out. ‘You’ should simply See how these faults arise!
Pratikraman Needs to Be Done for However
Many Faults There Are
One is a receptacle of infi nite faults, so an according
number of pratikraman will need to be done [to clear the
faults]. However many faults that have been fi lled in, You only
have to See them. They can be Seen once the Gnani Purush
has imparted Gnan. Otherwise, one will not be able to see
his own faults; that is indeed what is referred to as agnanta
(ignorance of the Self). One cannot see a single one of his own
faults, but if he wants to see those of others, then he can see
many; that is referred to as mithyatva (delusion).
The Vision Towards Seeing One’s Own Faults
After attaining this Gnan, See the bad thoughts that
arise within, See the good thoughts that arise within. There is
no attachment towards the good, and there is no abhorrence
towards the bad. There is no need for You to see the good and
the bad. This is because the authority is fundamentally not in
Your hands. So what do the Gnanis See? They See the entire
world as fl awless. This is because, all of this is discharge, so
how can the poor person be at fault in that? If someone hurls
abuse at you, that is discharge. If your boss confuses you, that
too is discharge. The boss is simply an evidentiary instrument
(nimit). No one in the world is at fault. The fact that the faults
of others are seen is your own mistake, and those are indeed
blunders. And the world is perpetuating verily because of that.
Vengeance is bound by seeing the faults of others, by seeing
the negatives of others.
Jai Sat Chit Anand
(Awareness of the Eternal is Bliss)
Self-Realization 37
Adjust Everywhere
Digest Just One Phrase
If you simply assimilate the phrase ‘adjust everywhere’
in your life, then that is more than enough. Peace will arise
automatically for you. If you do not adjust in this terrible era
of the time cycle, in this Kaliyug, then you will be ruined.
There is no problem if you do not know how to do
anything else in worldly life, but you must know how to
adjust. You will sail through in life if you adjust with anyone
who disadjusts with you. A person who knows how to adapt
to others will not have any suff ering at all. Adjust everywhere.
Adjustment with each and every person is the highest dharma.
There are various personality traits (prakruti) in this era of
the time cycle, so how will you manage without adjusting?
Ice cream does not tell you, “Run away from me.” If you
do not want to eat it, then don’t eat it. However, the elderly
keep getting irritated over it. The divisiveness due to diff erence
of opinion (matbhed) arises as a result of the changing times.
These youngsters act according to the times.
What ‘we’ are saying is to adjust according to the times.
If your son comes home wearing a new hat, you should not
say, “Where did you get such a thing?” Instead, make an
adjustment and ask him, “Where did you get such a nice hat
from? How much did it cost? You have got a good bargain!”
You should make an adjustment in this way.
What our moral duty says is, “See convenience when
there is inconvenience.” One night I thought to myself, ‘This
bed sheet is dirty,’ but then I made an adjustment that, ‘It
feels so soft, you can’t even imagine!’ The knowledge derived
through the fi ve senses shows inconvenience, whereas the Self
(Atma) shows convenience. Therefore, remain as the Self.
It is because of labeling things as good or bad that
38 Self-Realization
they [the opinions] harass you. You have to make both of
them equal. When you refer to this as ‘good’, the other
[automatically] becomes bad, and that is why it harasses you.
Adjust with the one who is speaking truthfully, as well as with
the one who is telling a lie. If someone were to say to ‘us’,
“You have no sense,” then I would immediately adjust and
tell him, “I never had any to begin with! Why have you come
looking for it now? You just happened to discover this today,
whereas I have known this since childhood.” If you say this,
then the problem ends, doesn’t it? He will certainly not come
to you looking for sense the second time around.
Adjustment With the Wife
Suppose that, for some reason, you are late coming
home and your wife starts to say off ensive things, negative
things such as, “You come home so late. I will not put up
with this, that, and the other...” If she has lost her temper, then
you should say, “Yes, you are right. If you tell me to, I’ll go
back. Otherwise, if you tell me to sit, I’ll sit inside.” She will
respond, “No, don’t go back, just be quiet and go to sleep.”
Then tell her, “If you tell me to, I’ll eat dinner, otherwise I’ll
go to sleep,” to which she will reply, “No, have your dinner.”
So, you should give in to her and eat. This way, you have
adjusted. Therefore, in the morning, she will serve you an
excellent cup of tea. However, if you were to scream and shout
at her, then she would bang your teacup on the table, and [the
quarrel] would continue for the next three days.
Adjustment During Mealtimes
One is considered as having [ideal] worldly interactions
when he adjusts everywhere! The time has now come for
development. So, do not have divisiveness due to diff erence
of opinion. That is the reason I have given people the phrase:
adjust everywhere! If the yogurt soup turns out to be salty,
then understand that Dada has said to make an adjustment;
Self-Realization 39
so go ahead and drink a little bit of the yogurt soup. Yes, and
if you happen to desire a bit of pickle, then go ahead and say,
“Bring some pickle.” But do not quarrel. There should be no
quarrelling in the home. If at times one is placed in diffi culty,
and if he makes an adjustment himself, then worldly life will
become beautiful.
Even if You Don’t Like It, Accept It
Even if someone tries to disadjust with you, you should
adjust with him. In day-to-day life, if there are dis-adjustments
between a mother-in-law and daughter-in-law, or between a
younger sister-in-law and older sister-in law, then the one who
wants to become free from the cycle of worldly life should
undoubtedly adjust. Even between a husband and wife, if one
keeps tearing things apart, then the other should patch things
back together; only then will the relationship sustain and peace
prevail. [In matters where] The truth is relative, there is no need
for insistence or stubbornness whatsoever. Who can be referred
to as a human? [The one who is] Everywhere adjustable!
Should You Improve Her or Adjust?
If you were to adjust to the other person in every aspect,
then things would become so straightforward! What are you
going to take with you [when you die]? Someone may say,
“Straighten her out.” Hey, if you try to straighten her out, then
you will end up becoming crooked. Therefore, do not try to
straighten out your wife; no matter what she is like, tell her
that she is correct. It would be a diff erent matter if you were
going to maintain a relationship with her life after life, but
who knows where she will be in her next life? You will both
die at diff erent times, and your karmas are diff erent! There is
nothing to give and nothing to take. Who knows to whom she
will go [in her next life] once she leaves from here? You may
manage to improve her, and in her next life, she will end up
becoming someone else’s wife!
40 Self-Realization
Therefore, do not try to straighten her out. She, too,
should not try to straighten you out. Whatever you have is
as good as gold. No one’s prakruti can ever straighten out. A
dog’s tail will always remain crooked. Therefore, you should
tread with caution. Let her be however she may be; adjust
everywhere.
Adjust With Diffi cult People
[Ideal] Worldly interactions are those in which one
adjusts such that even the neighbors proclaim, “Every
household has disputes, but this household does not have any
disputes.” It is indeed with those whom you do not get along
with that you need to develop the strength [to adjust]. With
those whom you get along with, the strength already exists. To
not get along is actually a weakness. Why do I get along with
everyone? Strength increases and weaknesses break according
to the number of adjustments one takes. Real understanding
will only set in once all wrong understanding is locked out.
Everyone adjusts with people who are soft, but when
one is able to adjust with obstinate, strong, strict, and all other
sorts of people, that is when his work will be accomplished!
It will not do if you get upset. Nothing in this world will ‘fi t’
[adjust] to you. However, if you ‘fi t’ to it, then this world is
good, whereas if you make it ‘fi t’ to you, then this world will
be obstinate. So, adjust everywhere.
When you need something, if the other person is
obstinate, even then you have to convince him. At the railway
station, if you need a porter, and if he is hesitant, then you
would convince him by giving an extra fi fteen rupees or so.
And if you do not convince him, then you would have to carry
the bags on your own head, wouldn’t you?
Complain? No, Adjust
You should know how to adjust at home too. If you go
Self-Realization 41
home late after attending satsang, then what will your family
say? “Shouldn’t you come home in good time?” So what is
wrong with going home early? Now why did you have to
undergo such a beating? It is because you had complained a
lot in your past [life] and these are the consequences of that.
Back in the day [in the past life], when you had come into
a position of power, you kept complaining. Now you have
no power, so you have to live without complaining. So now,
neutralize it [the karmic account]. When someone hurls an
abuse at you, credit it [in the karmic account]. You should
never be a complainer!
If a husband and wife both make a fi rm resolve that,
‘I want to adjust,’ then both will fi nd a solution. If he or she
insists a lot, then you should adjust, and you will have the
solution. If you do not adjust everywhere, then you will all
go mad. It is because you have kept harassing others that you
have gone mad.
The one who has learnt the art of adjustment has turned
from the world and onto the path of liberation (moksha). When
an adjustment is made, that is considered Gnan. The one who
has learned to take adjustments has sailed free.
Some people have a habit of sleeping late, and some
people have the habit of going to bed early, so how can the
two get along? Now, they all live together as a family, so what
is bound to happen? There would be one person in the home
who would say, “You do not have much sense.” So, you should
recognize, ‘He is indeed going to talk this way.’ Hence, you
should adjust. Instead, if you were to answer him back, then
you would become tired. That is because he collided with you,
but if you also collide with him, then it simply proves that you
do not have eyes either!
‘We’ recognize prakrutis, so even if you are looking to
confl ict, ‘we’ will not let you confl ict; ‘we’ would move away.
42 Self-Realization
Otherwise, we would both get into an accident, and both our
spare parts would break. If the other person’s ‘bumper’ breaks,
then what would be the state of the one sitting inside? The
condition of the one seated within completely fl attens, doesn’t
it? Therefore, recognize the prakruti. You should recognize
the prakruti of everyone at home.
It is not as if these confl icts happen every day, is it? They
only happen when your karma are ready to give their results;
you have to adjust at that time. If a fi ght happens with your
wife, then after the fi ght, take her out for dinner and make her
happy. From now on, a lingering eff ect should not remain.
Eat whatever comes on your plate. That which comes
in front of you is a circumstance and the Lord has said that if
you push away that circumstance, then that push will hit you!
That is why, if there are things that I do not particularly care
to eat on my plate, I will eat some of them anyway.
Therefore, if one does not know how to adjust, then
how can he be considered a human? A home will not have
any conflicts if adjustments are made according to the
circumstances. If you want to enjoy the benefi t of your wife’s
company, you should adjust. Otherwise, you will not benefi t
in any way, and vengeance is bound on top of that!
In each individual’s life, there should indeed be some
principles. Nevertheless, one should conduct himself according
to the circumstances. One who adjusts to circumstances is
considered a human. If one knows how to adjust in every
situation, then one is able to reach all the way to liberation;
that is how tremendous this tool is.
Dis-Adjustment Is Indeed Foolishness
What you speak should ‘adjust’ [be agreeable] to the
other person. It is indeed your mistake if what you say does not
‘adjust’ [agree] to the other person. If that mistake is broken,
Self-Realization 43
then you will adjust. The talk of the vitaraag Lords is one of
adjusting everywhere. This dis-adjustment is itself foolishness.
‘We’ refer to adjustment as justice. Insistence and obstinacy
cannot be considered justice.
Until today, no one has ever disadjusted with me.
Whereas a household of only four people do not adjust with
each other. Would you know how to adjust or not? Are you able
to do that or not? You will learn from whatever you observe,
won’t you? The law of this world is that you will indeed learn
from whatever you observe. There is nothing that has to be
taught in that.
There is no problem if you do not know anything else
in the world, there is no problem if you do not know much
about handling a business, but you should know how to adjust.
Therefore, in the situation at hand, you should learn how to
adjust. In this current era of the time cycle, if you do not know
how to adjust, you will suff er. Therefore, you should adjust
everywhere and get your work done.

44 Self-Realization
Avoid Clashes
Do Not Enter Into a Clash…
‘Do not enter into a clash with anyone and avoid
clashes.’ You will attain liberation if you revere this sentence
of mine. If one abides by just one sentence of mine, then it
will indeed lead one to liberation.
If you abide by a single word of mine for one day, then
tremendous energy will arise! There are so many energies
within to resolve all kinds of clashes, no matter what clash
someone may create.
If you get into a clash with anyone by mistake, then settle
it. Causally walk away from that confl ict without creating any
sparks of friction.
Accidents Are Prevented Through Traffi c Laws
It is always the case that in every collision, both parties
suff er. If you hurt anyone, then you will inevitably suff er at
that very moment. That is a collision; that is why I have given
this example that, the laws of traffi c are such that if you collide
with someone, you may end up getting killed. There is danger
in collision. Therefore, do not collide with anyone. Similarly,
do not get into collisions in worldly aff airs.
If someone comes to shout at you, if words come fl ying
at you like bombs, then you should know that a clash is to be
avoided. There may be no eff ect on your mind whatsoever,
yet if some eff ect arises all of a sudden, then you should know
that the eff ect of the other person’s mind has fallen upon you.
Therefore, you should move aside. All of those are clashes. As
you continue to understand this, you will be able to avoid more
and more clashes. By avoiding clashes, liberation is attained.
This world has arisen due to clashes. To this, the Lord
has said that it has arisen due to enmity. Every human being,
Self-Realization 45
in fact, every living being harbors vengeance. When it goes
too far, they will not refrain from harboring vengeance. Then
whether it is a snake, a scorpion, a bullock, or a buff alo,
whatever it is, it will harbor vengeance. This is because the
Self exists in everyone. The energy of the Self is the same in
everyone. However, it is due to the weakness of the non-Self
complex (pudgal) that one has to tolerate things. But while
tolerating it, one will not refrain from harboring enmity and
moreover, one will seek vengeance in the next life!
If someone talks too much, then no matter what he
says, it should not give rise to a clash within you. And to say
something that creates interference for the other person is the
biggest off ense of all.
Tolerate It? No, Find a Solution
To avoid clashes does not mean to tolerate. If you do
tolerate it, how much will you tolerate? To tolerate is the
same as pressing a spring. How long can a spring remain
compressed? So defi nitely do not learn to tolerate, learn how
to bring about a solution. In the ignorant state, one indeed has
to tolerate. Then one day, the compressed spring recoils and
causes a lot of damage.
Whatever you have to tolerate due to others is indeed
because of your own karmic account. However, you do not
know from which [karmic] ledger and from where this stock is
coming, so you assume that it is something new being directed
at you. No one would ever give out anew; that which had
been given out in the past is being returned. Examine through
this Knowledge that, ‘Whatever has come to me is due to the
unfolding of my own karma, the other person is only a nimit
(an apparent doer who is simply instrumental in the process
of unfolding karma).’
You Clashed Due to Your Own Mistake
Any clash that arises in this world is indeed your own
46 Self-Realization
mistake; it is not the mistake of the other person. The other
person is going to clash anyway. If asked, “Why did you clash?”
The response would be, “Because the other person clashed!”
So, not only are you blind, but he has become blind too.
If a clash arises, then you should come to the realization
that, ‘What was it I said that caused this clash?’ Once you
realize your own mistake, it means a solution has come
about; thereafter the puzzle is solved. Otherwise, as long as
you keep trying to prove that the other person is at fault, the
puzzle will never be solved. Only when you accept that, ‘It
is my mistake,’ will you be free from this world. There is no
other solution. If you clash with anyone at all, then that is a
sign of your own ignorance.
If a child were to throw a rock at you right now and
blood were to gush forth, then how would you react towards
that child? You would get angry at him. And what if you are
going about your way and a rock falls from a hilltop? It hits
you and blood gushes forth. What would you do then? Would
you get angry? No. Why is that? It is because the rock fell
from the hilltop! And it does not matter that the child may be
feeling remorse about what he did. Whereas who is responsible
for the rock that fell from the hilltop?
A Science Worth Understanding
Questioner: I do not want to clash, but what should I
do if the other person comes and starts a fi ght?
Dadashri: If you were to fi ght with this wall, how long
would you be able to fi ght? If you hit your head against this
wall one day, then what would you do with it? You hit your
head, meaning you had a fi ght with the wall, so does that
mean you should keep hitting the wall? Similarly, those who
instigate a lot of clashes are all walls! Why look at others in
this? You should understand on your own that they are like
walls. There is no problem thereafter.
Self-Realization 47
Do you have the authority to scold this wall? Similarly,
you do not have the authority to scold other people. And the
clash that is going to happen through his nimit will not refrain
from happening. So what is the point in needlessly screaming
and shouting? The other person possesses no independent
control in that! So why don’t you become like a wall! If you
keep scolding your wife, then the God who resides within
her takes note, ‘He is scolding me!’ And when she scolds
you, become like a wall, then the God residing within you
will help you.
To have divisiveness due to diff erence of opinion with
someone and to collide into a wall are one and the same, there
is no diff erence between the two. A person bumps into a wall
because he cannot see and divisiveness due to diff erence of
opinion also arises when one cannot see. He cannot see beyond
[the situation]. He is not able to come up with a solution
beyond this, so divisiveness due to diff erence of opinion
arises. All this anger, pride, deceit, and greed arises due to the
inability to see what lies beyond! Shouldn’t we understand
this point? The fault is of the one who gets hurt; is the wall
really at fault? So everything in this world is indeed a wall.
When we bump into a wall, we do not set out to establish who
was right and who was wrong, do we? We do not go through
the trouble of fi ghting with it that, ‘I am right,’ do we? In the
same way, right now this [person] is indeed in the state of a
wall. There is no need whatsoever to prove to the person that
you were right.
Clash Is Indeed Our Own Ignorance
What is the cause behind clashes? Ignorance. As long as
divisiveness due to diff erence of opinion arises with anyone,
that is a sign of your weakness. People are not wrong. In the
divisiveness due to diff erence of opinion, the fault is yours.
People are not at fault at all. If someone is doing something
deliberately, then there you should ask for forgiveness by
48 Self-Realization
saying, “Brother, I do not understand this.” Where clash arises,
the fault is indeed yours.
Energies Get Destroyed Through Friction
If all the energies of the Self were to ever get
destroyed, then it is through friction. If one collides even
slightly due to friction, then he is done for! If the other
person collides, then you should remain under restraint. If
only there were no collisions, then a person would attain
liberation. If someone learns that, ‘I do not want to get into
a collision at all,’ then he will not need a guru or anyone else
in between. In one or two lifetimes, he would go directly to
liberation. If it gets set in his conviction and he makes the
decision that, ‘I do not want to get into a collision at all,’
then samkit (the right belief of ‘I am pure Soul’) will set in
from that very moment!
The friction that arose in the past and the loss that was
incurred; that [energy] is indeed coming back. But if you
now create new friction, then the energy will leave again.
The energy that arose will also leave, and if you do not allow
friction to take place at all, then the energy will keep arising!
In this world, friction happens due to enmity. The root
cause of worldly life is enmity. The one for whom enmity and
friction have stopped, that person has attained liberation! Love
is not a hindrance; if enmity leaves, then love arises.
Common Sense, Everywhere Applicable
If someone clashes with you but you do not clash with
them, if you can prevail in this way, then common sense
will arise. However, you should not clash with anyone;
otherwise, you will lose your common sense. There should
be no friction from your end. Through another person’s
friction, common sense arises in you. The energy of the Self
is such that it will reveal all the solutions for how to conduct
Self-Realization 49
yourself during times of friction. And once it reveals that,
that knowledge will never leave you. In this way, common
sense will accumulate.
There is no problem if negative thoughts arise for
this wall, because the loss is one-sided. Whereas if even a
single negative thought arises for a living being, then that is
detrimental. Losses will be incurred on both sides. However,
if you do pratikraman for it, then all the faults will be erased.
Therefore, do pratikraman wherever friction arises, so the
friction will come to an end.
For those who do not clash, I give the guarantee that they
will attain liberation in three lifetimes. If a clash arises, then
do pratikraman. All those clashes will arise. As long as there
is sexuality, as long as there are sexual relations, confl icts will
arise. This is indeed the root of confl ict. No one can conquer
the one who conquers sexuality, no one can even challenge
such a person. Such a person has an aura of infl uence.

50 Self-Realization
Whatever Has Happened Is Justice
Nature Is Always Just
Not even for a moment has nature’s justice been unjust.
Not even for a single moment has this nature ever dispensed
injustice. Courts may have been established, everything may
be overlooked in the courts; but nature has certainly never
dispensed injustice.
If you understand nature’s justice that ‘Whatever has
happened is justice,’ then you will be able to become free from
this world. Otherwise, if you consider nature as unjust even to
the slightest extent, then that verily is the place which makes
you remain entangled in this world. To believe that nature is
just is called Knowledge (Gnan). To Know things as they are
is referred to as Knowledge and to not know things as they
are is referred to as ignorance.
The wars in this world have indeed come about due
to the pursuit of justice. The world is certainly in a state of
justice. Therefore, do not seek justice in this world at all. That
which has happened is justice. These law courts and the like
have been established because people are seeking justice!
Hey mortal one, how can that be justice? Instead of that, just
observe what has happened! That itself is justice. Actually, the
eff ect of justice or injustice comes about due to past karmic
accounts, whereas you try to join [link your idea of] justice to
that. Then you certainly have to take things to court, don’t you!
Now, if you happen to hurl one abuse at someone, then
he may hurl two to three back at you. That is because his
mind has become agitated towards you. In this case, what
would people say [to him]? “Why did you hurl three abuses
in return, he had hurled only one at you.” So, where is the
justice in this? He actually has to hurl only three back at you.
Would he or would he not clear the pending karmic account
of the past? What is nature’s justice like? It brings together
Self-Realization 51
all the past karmic accounts that are to be settled. Currently, if
a wife is badgering her husband, then that is nature’s justice.
While the husband feels, ‘This wife is very bad,’ what does
the wife think? ‘My husband is bad.’ Nevertheless, this is
indeed nature’s justice.
[Someone may get robbed of their hard-earned money.]
That may be the hard-earned money of this current life.
However, there are pending karmic accounts from the past
[life], aren’t there? It is because there are pending accounts;
otherwise, no one can ever take anything of yours. No one has
the power to take anything at all. Moreover, if someone were
to take anything, then that would actually be because of some
ongoing past karmic account. There is no such person born in
the world who can possibly do anything to anyone [without a
cause]. The world is in such precise regulation.
The Cause Can Be Determined From the Eff ect
These are all results. They are comparable to the results
received in test examinations. Say one receives ninety-fi ve
marks out of a hundred in mathematics, while in English, he
receives twenty-fi ve marks out of a hundred. Then would you
not know where the mistake lies? Based on the results, would
you not be able to identify the reasons why the mistakes were
made? All these circumstances that come together, they are all a
result. Now, based on the result, the cause behind it can be found.
A thorn from an acacia tree lies upright on a road, where
many people come and go every day. Several people walk on
that road, nevertheless, the thorn remains in the very same
position. Now, you would never go anywhere without any
footwear, but on that day, you happen to be visiting someone
[having left your footwear at their doorstep]. All of a sudden,
someone shouts out, “Thief! There is a thief!” In a rush, you
immediately leave barefoot and the thorn ends up pricking
you. That is your karmic account!
52 Self-Realization
If someone hurts you, then you should credit it. Whatever
you may have given is exactly what has to be credited. This
is because there is no such law here which allows one to hurt
another person without any reason. There has to be a cause
behind it. Hence, you should credit it.
What Is It Like in God’s Realm?
The Lord is neither an embodiment of justice nor is
He an embodiment of injustice. ‘May no one be hurt’; that
is the only language of God. ‘Justice’ and ‘injustice’ is in the
language of the world.
A thief believes stealing to be his moral duty, while a
donor believes in giving charity as his moral duty. That is
the language of the world; it is not God’s language. There is
nothing like this or like that, in God’s realm. There is only
this much in God’s realm: ‘No living being should be hurt,
this is Our only directive.’
One’s Own Faults Show It to Be Injustice
It is only due to one’s own fault that the entire world
appears to be without regulation. Not even for a moment
has it been without regulation. It is completely in the realm
of justice. It is possible for justice dispensed by the courts
here to have a discrepancy. It could turn out to be false.
However, there is no discrepancy in the justice dispensed
by nature.
And never, not even for a single second, has there been a
discrepancy in nature’s justice. If it were dispensing injustice,
then no one would ever attain fi nal liberation. However,
people do ask, “Why is it that good people face diffi culties?”
In fact, people are not able to create any such diffi culties. This
is because if you do not interfere in anything, then there is
no such force that can challenge you. It is because you have
interfered that all of this has arisen.
Self-Realization 53
The World Is Just
This world is not baseless. The world is in a natural
state of justice. Nature has never dispensed injustice at all.
Whenever nature injures a person, when an accident happens,
all of that is in a state of justice. Nature has never stepped
outside the realm of justice. Due to wrong understanding,
people needlessly make unsubstantiated claims. In addition,
they do not know the art of how to live life; they remain in
worries and more worries. Therefore, consider whatever has
happened to be justice.
If one were to understand, ‘Whatever has happened
is justice,’ then it is possible for one to traverse worldly
life completely. Even for a second, never has injustice been
dispensed in the world, only justice itself has been done. So,
it is the intellect that is trapping you by asking, ‘How can this
be considered justice?’ Hence, the fundamental point ‘we’
are saying is that this is how it is with nature and You should
separate Yourself from the intellect. After having understood
this once, You should not agree with the intellect. Whatever
happened is justice. In the justice dispensed by the courts,
things may go out of order, but there is no discrepancy in this
[nature’s] justice.
People have tired themselves out in persistently seeking
justice. A person may feel, ‘What have I spoilt of yours, that
you are spoiling this of mine.’ Instead, you went to seek
justice there, so you are receiving all these beatings for that.
Therefore, you should not seek justice. It is because of seeking
justice that all these people have been bruised, and even after
that, whatever ended up happening was the same result. At
the end of it all, the exact same result came about. So, why
not understand it right from the beginning? This is simply an
interference of the ego!
54 Self-Realization
The End of All Wrong Beliefs Is the Only Path to
Liberation
Now, when the intellect gives rise to wrong beliefs, then
You should tell it, ‘What has happened is justice.’ When the
intellect seeks justice by saying, ‘He is younger than me, he
is crossing his boundary.’ If he remains within his boundary,
then that itself is justice; and if he crosses it, then that too is
justice. As much as the intellect becomes non-argumentative,
one will start to become free from wrong beliefs!
When one goes out to seek justice, it means that the
wrong beliefs keep on increasing. Whereas the justice of
nature converts the wrong beliefs into the right belief. If it has
happened, then it is justice. Despite this, even after a person
involves fi ve diff erent arbitrators, the ruling delivered goes
against him. As he does not accept that as justice, he does
not accept anyone else’s justice. Therefore, his wrong beliefs
keep on increasing. So, a person who continues to weave such
an entangled mass around himself does not attain anything.
He suff ers immensely! Instead of that, he should maintain
the conviction right from the beginning that, ‘Whatever has
happened is justice.’
And nature always keeps dispensing justice only. It is
constantly dispensing justice alone. However, it cannot give
proof of this. Only the Gnani can give the proof of, ‘In what
way is it considered justice?’ It is the Gnani who can explain
this. As the Gnani satisfactorily explains this to a person, only
then can ultimate closure come about. When One becomes
free from all wrong beliefs, that is when ultimate closure
comes about.

Self-Realization 55
The Fault Is of the Suff erer
In Nature’s Court…
Those who pass judgment in this world can be found
everywhere, however, the natural judge in the world of karma
is only one: The fault is of the suff erer. This is the only justice.
The entire world functions on this, while worldly life is entirely
founded upon illusory justice.
Not even for a single moment does the world remain
without regulation. It rewards the one who is to be rewarded.
It punishes the one who is to be punished. The world does
not operate outside of regulation; it is always in regulation.
It is completely in the realm of justice. However, because it
does not come into one’s vision, it is not understood. When
one’s vision becomes pure, it will be seen as justice. As long
as there is a selfi sh worldly perspective, how can it be deemed
as justice?
Why Do We Have to Suff er?
Why do we have to suff er? Why don’t you fi gure that
out? In fact, it is due to our fault that we have been bound.
People have not come to bind us. When the fault is destroyed,
then there will be liberation. And indeed You are free, but you
suff er bondage because of faults!
People are not at all aware of the arcane knowledge
regarding the reality of this world. While everyone knows
the knowledge of the relative world, that makes one wander
endlessly. When your pocket gets picked, who is at fault? This
person’s pocket did not get picked, and why is it that only your
pocket got picked? Between the two of you, who is the one
suff ering right now? The fault is of the suff erer!
One Has to Suff er Because of His Own Faults
For the one who suff ers, the fault is his; and the one who
56 Self-Realization
enjoys happiness, that is his reward. However, the law that
is based on wrong belief catches the nimit (the apparent doer
who is only instrumental in the unfolding karma). Whereas
God’s law only catches the one who is really at fault. This
law is exact and it is not possible to make any change to
it whatsoever. There is no law in this world that can give
suff ering to anyone!
There must be some kind of fault in you, only then
would the other person say something, right? Therefore, just
go ahead and destroy the mistake! In this world, no living
being can cause distress to another living being; that is how
independent it is. However, if someone is causing distress, then
it is because of interference done in the past. Upon destroying
the mistake, there will be no karmic account left.
The world is not for suffering, it is for enjoying
happiness. The magnitude of karmic account one has, that
much he will face. Some people experience only happiness.
Why is that? Some experience only unhappiness. Why is that?
It is because one has brought forth such karmic accounts. The
hurt that one has to suff er is indeed one’s own fault and no
one else’s. The one who hurts you is not at fault. According
to the worldly law, the one who hurts you is at fault, while as
per God’s law, the fault is of the suff erer.
The Result of Your Own Faults
Every time you have to suff er something, it is as a result
of your own fault. Without a fault of our own, we do not have
to suff er. There is no person in this world who can hurt you in
the slightest, and if there is someone who hurts you, then that
is indeed your own fault. It is not the other person’s fault. He
is an apparent doer who is instrumental in the unfolding of
your own karma. Therefore, the fault is of the suff erer.
If a husband and wife are quarreling a lot, but after a
Self-Realization 57
while when they go to bed, if we quietly check on them, the
wife will be sound asleep while the husband will be tossing
and turning. From this, we should understand that it is all the
husband’s fault since the wife is not suff ering at all. Whoever’s
fault it is, they suff er. And at that time, if the husband is
sleeping while the wife stays awake, then you should know
that it is the wife’s fault. The fault is of the suff erer. The entire
world ‘bites’ [blames] only the apparent doer.
What Is God’s Law?
What does the law of God say? “At whatever location, at
whatever time, whoever suff ers, that person is actually at fault.
When someone’s pocket gets picked, it results in joy for the
pickpocket. He may be having tea and snacks at a restaurant,
while at that time, the one whose pocket was picked would
be suff ering. Therefore, the suff erer is at fault. He must have
committed a theft in the past [life] and has been caught today.
That is why he is considered a thief [at fault]. Now, when the
pickpocket will be caught, at that time he will be considered
a thief.
The entire world looks at the faults of others. They are
the ones suff ering, but they see the fault of the other person.
Ironically, the faults double up and worldly entanglements also
increase. Once you understand this point, the entanglements
gradually decrease.
The law of this world is that whatever the eyes see is
referred to as a fault, while the law of nature is that the one
who is suff ering is at fault.
Do not hurt anyone whatsoever. If someone were to hurt
you and you credit it, then your book of karmic accounts would
clear. When you do not hurt anybody in return, when you do
not start any new transactions, and you settle the pending
accounts, then it will get paid off .
58 Self-Realization
The One Who Frees You From Karma Is a
Benefactor
In this world, no one is at fault. Those who fi nd faults
in others are at fault. No one is at fault in this world indeed.
Each person is subject to the unfolding of his or her own
karma. Everyone is suff ering, however, it is not that they are
committing faults today. All this is happening as an eff ect of
karma from the past life. Today, the person may be remorseful,
but that ‘contract’ [from the past life] has already been made,
so what can be done? There is no other option but for it to
come into eff ect.
Is the mother-in-law hurting the daughter-in-law or is the
daughter-in-law hurting the mother-in-law? Who is suff ering
in that? If it is the mother-in-law, then it is the fault of the
mother-in-law. If the mother-in-law is hurting the daughterin-law, then the daughter-in-law should understand, ‘It is
my fault.’ Based on Dada’s Gnan, she should understand,
‘There must be a fault on my part and that is indeed why she
is hurling abuses at me.’ So she should not fi nd any faults in
the mother-in-law. Finding faults in the mother-in-law results
in increased entanglements and complexities. Moreover, if
the daughter-in-law is harassing the mother-in-law, then with
Dada’s Gnan, the mother-in-law should understand, ‘The
fault is of the suff erer and because of that, I should accept
this karmic account.’
If you want to become free, then whatever bitter or
sweet repayments come your way, you should credit them.
The past karmic account will be paid off . In this world, it is
not at all possible for mere eye contact to occur without a
previous karmic account! So then is it possible for anything
else to happen without a past karmic account? However much
you have given to others, they will return that same amount
to you. At that time, be happy and credit it, knowing that,
Self-Realization 59
‘Whew! Now the book of karmic accounts will come to an
end.’ Otherwise, if you make a mistake, then you will certainly
have to suff er it again.
It is due to one’s own fault that one receives beatings.
The one who threw the stone is not at fault. The one who
was hit is at fault! No matter what the faults or misdeeds are
of the children around you, if you are not aff ected by them,
then it is not your fault. And if you are aff ected by them, then
understand that it is indeed your fault!
Analyze It in This Way
Whose fault is it? To answer that, fi gure out who is the
one suff ering? If ten teacups were to break at the hands of the
house help, then would it have an eff ect on the members of the
household or not? Now, among the members of the household,
there are children; there is no suff ering for them in this. Their
father and mother continue to get frustrated. Of the two of
them, the mother would at least fall asleep peacefully after
a little while, but the father would keep on calculating, ‘Ten
times fi ve is fi fty. That’s how many rupees the cups amount to!’
Because he is alert, he has to suff er more. The conclusion of
this is that the fault is of the suff erer. If one were to proceed by
analyzing this much, then one would attain liberation directly.
Questioner: Some people are such that no matter how
well we conduct ourselves with them, they do not understand.
Dadashri: When the other person does not understand,
then it is a result of your own fault. Pointing out other’s faults
is very wrong. It is due to one’s own fault that one comes
across a nimit (an apparent doer who is instrumental in the
unfolding of karma). Moreover, if one were to come across a
living nimit, then one would even ‘bite’ him, and what would
one do if he were pricked by a thorn? Suppose there is a thorn
at the intersection and thousands of people walk over it, yet
60 Self-Realization
it does not prick anyone. And when Chandubhai walks by,
even if the thorn is bent backward, it pricks him on the foot.
Whoever is to be pricked by the thorn, that person alone will
be pricked. It [vyavasthit, the result of scientifi c circumstantial
evidences] brings together all the [necessary] circumstances,
so what is the fault of the nimit in this?
If someone were to ask me, “In what way can I fi nd my
own faults?” Then I would teach him, “Where is it that you
experience suff ering? That is your fault. Find out what fault
you must have done to endure such suff ering.”
What Is the Original Fault?
Whose fault is it? It is of the one who suff ers! What is
the fault? The belief of ‘I am Chandubhai’ is itself your fault.
This is because no one in this world is at fault whatsoever.
Hence, no one is a culprit either. Therefore, that is proved.
The one who hurts you is merely a nimit. The original
fault is actually your own. The one who benefi ts you is a nimit
and the one who harms you is also a nimit. In both cases, it is
indeed your own karmic account, and that is why it happens!

Self-Realization 61
Pratikraman: The Tool to Wash Your Own
Faults
Kraman, Atikraman, and Pratikraman
All the activity that takes place in worldly life is kraman.
As long as it occurs naturally and spontaneously, it is kraman,
but if it becomes excessive [and hurtful], it is atikraman. And
for the atikraman that occurs, one will have to do pratikraman
(apology coupled with repentance to the Lord within) without
fail if he wants to be free. This means that he will have to
wash it off , only then will he become clean. It is because in
the past life one had done the intent, ‘I want to slap that man
four times,’ so in this life, that intent materializes and he
ends up slapping a person four times. That is considered as
atikraman taking place, so one has to do pratikraman for it.
Upon recalling the pure Soul within that person, pratikraman
should be done for him.
Any negative conduct that takes place is referred to as
atikraman. The negative conduct that takes place is considered
a ‘stain’, it keeps ‘biting’ you in your mind. In order to get rid
of it, pratikraman should be done. Through this pratikraman,
even the other person’s intent (bhaav) towards you will
change. You will have good intents and even the other person
will have good intents. This is because there is so much power
in pratikraman that a tiger would become like a dog! When
would pratikraman be useful? When any negative eff ects arise
that is defi nitely when it becomes useful.
The True Understanding of Pratikraman
What is pratikraman? Pratikraman means when the
other person is insulting you, you should understand, ‘Who is
the one at fault for this insult?’ You should fi rst decide whether
the person giving [the insult] is the one at fault or the person
suff ering is the one at fault. The person giving the insult is not
62 Self-Realization
at fault at all; he is not at fault in the slightest. He happens to be
a nimit (an apparent doer who is instrumental in the unfolding
of karma) and it is only due to the unfolding of your own karma
that you come across this nimit. Therefore, this is indeed your
own fault. Now the reason for doing pratikraman is that if you
have bad intents for the other person, then pratikraman should
be done. If thoughts such as, ‘He is worthless, he is cunning,’
have arisen in the mind, then pratikraman should be done.
Besides, if anyone hurls abuse at you, it is due to your very
own karmic account; that person is simply a nimit. When your
pocket gets picked, the pickpocket is a nimit and the karmic
account is indeed your own. Yet, people ‘bite’ [blame] only
the nimit and this is the very reason for all the quarrels.
In the daily worldly interactions that you carry out, when
you end up doing something wrong, you realize that the way
you interacted with the other person was wrong. Wouldn’t you
realize this? So the worldly interactions that you carry out are
kraman. Kraman means worldly interactions (vyavahaar).
Now say you have a disagreement with someone; you will
realize that you used harsh words with that person or that your
behavior was wrong. Would you realize this or not? That is
called atikraman.
Atikraman means you’ve gone in the wrong direction,
and to come back to the same extent in the right direction is
pratikraman.
The True Vidhi for Pratikraman
Questioner: How do we do pratikraman?
Dadashri: Recall the pure Soul who is separate from
the mind, speech, and body complex, charge karma, subtle
discharge karma, and gross discharge karma, Chandubhai
and all illusion related to the name of Chandubhai, and say,
“Oh pure Soul, I have spoken in a harsh manner and that is
a mistake of mine. So I am asking for forgiveness for this.
Self-Realization 63
And I am making the resolve to never repeat this mistake.
Give me the energy to not repeat this mistake.” By recalling
the pure Soul or by recalling Dada and saying, ‘This mistake
has happened,’ is alochana, and washing off that mistake
is pratikraman, and making the resolve to never repeat
the mistake is pratyakhyan. When you do something that
harms or hurts the other person, that is all atikraman. And
alochana, pratikraman, and pratyakhyan needs to be done
for it immediately.
With such pratikraman, not only will your life run
beautifully, but it will also be possible to attain fi nal liberation!
The Lord has said, ‘You will attain fi nal liberation only if you
do pratikraman for all your atikraman.’

Pratikraman Vidhi: Three-Step Process of
Reversal from a Mistake
With Dada Bhagwan as a witness, oh pure Soul of [insert
the name of the person you have hurt], who is separate from
the activity of the mind, speech, body, charge karma, subtle
discharge karma, and gross discharge karma, with You as a
witness, I am asking for forgiveness for whichever faults I
have done*, up to this day. I atone for them with all my heart.
Forgive me, forgive me, forgive me, and I am making the
fi rm resolve to never repeat such faults again. Grant me the
absolute energy for this.
* Recall internally the faults in which you have hurt
the other person throughout the course of your life through
anger-pride-deceit-greed, sexuality, and so on.

64 Self-Realization
The Purpose of the Non-Sectarian Trimandir
Whenever there is the presence of the manifest Lord
in human form (mool Purush), such as Lord Mahavir, Lord
Krishna, and Lord Ram, He draws people out of their religious
prejudices and establishes them in the religion of the Self
(Atma dharma). However, because of the era of the time
cycle and the absence of a mool Purush, divisiveness due to
diff erences in opinion gradually forms, and sects and divisions
form within religions. As a result of this, there is a decline in
peace and harmony.
Akram Vignani (the scientist of the direct path to
liberation), absolutely revered Dada Bhagwan [Dadashri], not
only established the religion of the Self in people, but along
with that, in order to move people away from the disputes of
‘yours’ and ‘mine’, to remove people from the grave karmic
liabilities ensuing from their insistence towards partiality, he
took an unprecedented step, that of bringing together the three
major religions [of India; Jain, Vaishnav, Shiva] impartially,
on a single platform.
It was for completing the goal of attaining liberation
that Lord Mahavir gave people the path of attaining Selfrealization. In the Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna gave Arjun
the divine Vision to See the Self in every living being (Atmavat
sarva bhuteshu). And it is when the separation between jeev
(the worldly being; the embodied soul) and Shiva (the liberated
being; the Self) is forgotten that One Himself becomes
Shiva, One reaches the state of ‘Chidanandaroop, Shivohum
Shivohum’ (I am the liberated One whose existence in pure
Knowledge and Vision as the Self leads to bliss). Thus, the
essence conveyed by the mool Purush of each religion was
only that of attaining the Knowledge of the Self (Atma Gnan).
If one understands this, then the spiritual eff ort to attain
the Knowledge of the Self begins, and by Seeing everyone
Self-Realization 65
through the Vision as the Self, oneness arises with all. The
intention constantly remains that may we never refute or hurt
the foundation of any religion.
Absolutely revered Dadashri used to say that any
viradhana (going against another living being, leading
to spiritual descent) that is done, whether knowingly or
unknowingly, can be washed away through aaradhana
(devotion and dedication; worship). Upon entering the nonsectarian Trimandir, when one bows down with folded hands,
with naturalness and spontaneity, in front of the idols of the
various Gods and deities, all the internal insistence, obstinacy
and discriminatory beliefs begin to erase and one starts to
become free from all insistence.
The primary headquarters of the non-sectarian Trimandir
inspired by Dada Bhagwan is located in Adalaj, on the
Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway, approximately 18 kilometers
away from the city of Ahmedabad. In addition, the Trimandir
has been built in the cities of Ahmedabad, Rajkot, Bhuj, Anjar,
Godhra, Morbi, Surendranagar, Amreli, Vadodara, Jamnagar,
and Mumbai, as well as the villages of Chalamali, Bhadran,
Vasna, and Katosan. The construction of the Trimandir in
additional cities and villages is in the works.

Information about the Gnan Vidhi
What Is the Gnan Vidhi?
It is a scientifi c experiment that separates the Self
and the non-Self and imparts Self-realization. It is
diff erent from the spiritual discourse (satsang) which
is conducted in a question and answer format.
The Knowledge that manifested within the absolutely
revered Dada Bhagwan in 1958 is the very same
Knowledge that is imparted through the medium of
the Self-realized revered Deepakbhai, with the grace of
Dada Bhagwan and the blessings of the Self-realized
revered Niruma.
Why Take Part in the Gnan Vidhi?
To become free from the cycle of birth and death, to
attain fi nal liberation.
To awaken and experience the Soul, your real Self.
To experience peace and happiness within the home,
the family, and all worldly interactions.
What Happens Through the Gnan Vidhi?
The demerit karma of infi nite past lives are annihilated.
The wrong beliefs formed in a state of ignorance are
dispelled.
The awakened awareness as the Self emerges.
Keys to carry out worldly life interactions using the
right understanding are attained.
New karma are no longer bound and old karma
gradually exhaust.
Is It Necessary to Be Physically Present for the
Gnan Vidhi?
The Gnan Vidhi is the result of the Gnani’s grace and
blessings. Thus, it is necessary to be physically present.
Spiritual knowledge attained by watching the satsang
videos of revered Niruma and revered Deepakbhai on
TV or online, by reading books, and so on, are helpful
in giving you the relevant background information
about Gnan (the Knowledge of the Self). However,
Self-realization cannot be attained through these
means.
Any spiritual practice done for attaining Gnan will
defi nitely give rise to peace. However, to awaken the
Self, it is necessary to come in person and take part in
the Gnan Vidhi. Just as an illustration of a lamp cannot
provide illumination, only a real lamp can provide
illumination.
Please note:
You do not have to change your religion or your guru
to take part in the Gnan Vidhi.
As the Knowledge of the Self is something that is
invaluable, the Gnan Vidhi is completely free of cost.

Books of Akram Vignan of Dada Bhagwan
1. Adjust Everywhere
2. Anger
3. Aptavani - 1
4. Aptavani - 2
5. Aptavani - 4
6. Aptavani - 5
7. Aptavani - 6
8. Aptavani - 8
9. Aptavani - 9
10. Autobiography of Gnani Purush A.M.Patel
11. Avoid Clashes
12. Brahmacharya: Celibacy Attained With Understanding
13. Death: Before, During and After...
14. Flawless Vision
15. Generation Gap
16. Harmony in Marriage
17. Life Without Confl ict
18. Money
19. Noble Use of Money
20. Non-Violence
21. Pratikraman: The Master Key That Resolves All Confl icts
 (Abridged & Big Volume)
22. Pure Love
23. Right Understanding to Help Others
24. Science of Karma
25. Science of Speech
26. The Current Living Tirthankara Shree Simandhar Swami
27. Simple and Eff ective Science for Self-Realization
28. The Essence of All Religion
29. The Fault Is of the Suff erer
30. The Guru and the Disciple
31. The Hidden Meaning of Truth and Untruth
32. The Practice of Humanity
33. Trimantra
34. Whatever Has Happened Is Justice
35. Who Am I?
36. Worries
‘Dadavani’ Magazine is published every month in English
Contacts
Dada Bhagwan Foundation
India :
Adalaj : Trimandir, Simandhar City, Ahmedabad-Kalol Highway,
 Adalaj, Dist.: Gandhinagar - 382421, Gujarat, India.
 Tel : + 91 79 35002100, +91 9328661166-77
 Email : info@dadabhagwan.org
Bangalore : +91 95909 79099
Delhi : +91 98100 98564
Kolkata : +91 98300 93230
Mumbai : +91 93235 28901
Other Countries :
Argentina : Tel: +54 91158431163
 Email: info@dadabhagwan.ar
Australia : Tel: +61 402179706
 Email: sydney@au.dadabhagwan.org
Brazil : Tel: +55 11999828971
 Email: info@br.dadabhagwan.org
Germany : Tel: +49 700 DADASHRI (32327474)
 Email: info@dadabhagwan.de
Kenya : Tel: +254 79592 DADA (3232)
 Email: info@ke.dadabhagwan.org
New Zealand : Tel: +64 21 0376434
 Email: info@nz.dadabhagwan.org
Singapore : Tel: + 65 91457800
 Email: info@sg.dadabhagwan.org
Spain : Tel: +34 922302706
 Email: info@dadabhagwan.es
UAE : Tel: +971 557316937
 Email: dubai@ae.dadabhagwan.org
UK : Tel : +44 330-111-DADA (3232)
 Email : info@uk.dadabhagwan.org
USA-Canada : Tel : +1 877-505-DADA (3232)
 Email : info@us.dadabhagwan.org
Website : www.dadabhagwan.org
(Main Center)